>>>section: conclusion
Conclusion: This novel drug product is well tolerated in animal models.
Keywords: Diabetes, Glucagon, Hypoglycemia, Insulin, Intranasal, Peptide hormones
Background
Diabetes mellitus has reached epidemic proportions in
much of the western world and is a serious and growing
public health concern in many developing economies.
Globally, there are approximately 285 million people
with diabetes and that number is expected to reach 438
million by 2030.
Diabetes complications are usually associated with
chronically elevated blood glucose levels, which result in
heart, kidney, and eye diseases, amputations, and 
neurological impairment. Unfortunately, there are very real
and serious complications associated with use of 
medications used to treat diabetes-related hyperglycemia. One
of the most common complications of treatment to
reduce blood sugar levels is hypoglycemia, most 
frequently seen in patients being treated with insulin (i.e., all
patients with type 1 diabetes as well as patients with type
2 diabetes on insulin), but also in patients with type 2
diabetes receiving insulin secretagogue (sulfonylurea and
meglitinides) treatment. Indeed, if it were not for the
barrier of hypoglycemia, people with diabetes could 
probably have normal blood glucose levels and thus avoid the
complications associated with hyperglycemia [1].
Depending on the severity of the episode, hypoglycemia
causes a wide range of physical problems ranging from
weakness, dizziness, sweating, and hunger to more serious
symptoms including blurred vision, behavior change,
seizures, coma and even death. In addition to the physical
effects of hypoglycemia, there are significant psychological
effects including fear of another episode, high levels of
anxiety, and low levels of overall happiness that adversely
affect glucose control and quality of life [2].
Based on reviews of the subject, patients with type 1
diabetes experience an average of one episode of severe
temporarily disabling hypoglycemia each year [3, 4].
Although persons with type 2 diabetes are generally less
susceptible to severe hypoglycemia, the incidence of
severe hypoglycemia is significant with annual incidence
rates varying from 0.02 to 0.35 episodes per patient per
year [5]. However, as the disease progresses, patients
with type 2 diabetes frequently show similar 
susceptibility to severe hypoglycemia as seen in patients with type
1 diabetes [6, 7].
According to the Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes
of the American Diabetes Association (ADA), severe
hypoglycemia in a conscious person should be treated by
the oral ingestion of 15-20 g carbohydrate, preferably as
glucose tablets or equivalent [8]. For severe hypoglycemia
in an unconscious individual in the home setting, the
recommended treatment is 1 mg glucagon by injection.
For severe hypoglycemia in an unconscious individual in
the presence of professional medical assistance and 
intravenous access, 10-25 g intravenous dextrose is 
recommended. In all cases, once the hypoglycemia has been
reversed, the patient should be given oral carbohydrates to
prevent repeated hypoglycemia.
Glucagon is a highly effective treatment for severe
hypoglycemia outside and within the hospital setting.
Because glucagon is unstable in solution, commercially
available emergency glucagon kits consist of lyophilized
glucagon powder that must be mixed with a diluent
immediately prior to injection. This procedure can be
complex, intimidating, and prone to potentially serious
errors, especially in an emergency situation for a 
care-giver, companion, or stranger who is not trained in
reconstitution and injection techniques.
Glucagon nasal powder (GNP; previously referred to
as AMG504-1) is a novel, nasally administered glucagon
powder formulation being developed for the treatment
of severe hypoglycemia, a commonly encountered 
life-threatening emergency in which the patient, typically an
insulin-using diabetic, requires third-party assistance to
correct the hypoglycemia. The drug is packaged within a
very simple and user-friendly, single-use, nasal powder
dosing device that delivers its entire contents into the
patient’s nose when it is activated by pushing on the
bottom of the dispenser (Fig. 1). The performance of the
device is patient-independent in that there is no need to
inhale (drug is absorbed from the nasal cavity) and the
device performs as expected regardless of the orientation
Reno et al. BMC Pharmacology and Toxicology  (2015) 16:29 Page 3 of 16
of the device (i.e., right side up or rotated 180°). This
product may simplify treatment of severe hypoglycemia
for non-medical caregivers of persons with diabetes.
GNP contains synthetic glucagon (10 % w/w) as well
as beta-cyclodextrin and dodecylphosphocholine (DPC).
Of the three ingredients in GNP, extensive safety and
toxicology data and a long history of clinical use have
been generated for glucagon and beta-cyclodextrin. The
third ingredient, DPC, contains a choline group, a 
phosphate group, and a saturated aliphatic chain that is 12
carbons in length. As all three moieties are present in
phospholipids and lecithins ubiquitous in mammalian
cell membranes [9], significant adverse effects associated
with DPC were not expected when it was chosen as the
excipient.
The toxicology program for GNP consists of three
components. The actual formulation (i.e., combination
of glucagon, beta-cyclodextrin, and DPC) selected for
clinical trials was studied to evaluate local and systemic
effects of the drug product. A second series of studies,
developed in accordance with the United States FDA’s
Guidance for Industry: Nonclinical Studies for the 
Development of Pharmaceutical Excipients, was conducted
to provide additional safety information and supplement
the safety profile of DPC. A third set of studies was
conducted to evaluate the in vitro cytotoxicity, skin
sensitization, and intra-cutaneous reactivity of the 
materials used in the actuator delivery device. We now report
the findings of four toxicology studies conducted in
animal models to evaluate the safety of the actual 
formulation of this product. The findings of the toxicology
studies with DPC and the materials used in the delivery
device are being reported separately.
Conclusions
In conclusion, IN administration of large overdoses of
GNP to rats and dogs for 28 consecutive days was well
tolerated and resulted in only mild to moderate fully
reversible histological changes to nasal mucosa in some
animals. Direct deposition into the lungs of rats did not
result in any adverse findings, suggesting that inadvertent
pulmonary exposure to GNP is likely to be well tolerated.
In addition, a single ocular instillation using the intended
powder dosing device pre-filled with 30 mg GNP to
male New Zealand white rabbits was well tolerated,
with minimal ocular irritation limited to slight erythema
and edema localized to the conjunctiva and palpebral
membrane.
Additional file
Additional file 1: Manuscript supplement. (DOCX 191 kb)
Abbreviations
AAALAC: Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal
Care; ACC: Animal Care Committee; ADA: American Diabetes Association;
AUC: Area under the curve; BID: bis in die (twice daily); CD: Cyclodextrins;
Cmax: Maximum concentration (in the plasma); CI: Confidence intervals;
CV: Coefficient of variation; DCE: Detailed clinical examination;
DPC: Dodecylphosphocholine; ECG: Electrocardiogram; FDA: Food and Drug
Administration; fL: Femtoliter; g: Gram; GNP: Glucagon nasal powder;
IACUC: Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee; ID: Identification
number; IN: Intranasal; IV: Intravenous; KIU: Kallikrein inhibitor unit (of aprotinin);
L: Litre; LD50: Median lethal dose; LLOQ: Lower limit of quantitation; LSM: Least
square means; μmol: Micromole; mmol: Millimole; mL: Millilitre; NIH: National
Institutes of Health; NRC: National Research Council; pg: Picogram; PR: PR
interval (beginning of the P wave to beginning of QRS complex in an ECG);
QRS: RS complex in an ECG (represents rapid depolarization of right and left
ventricles); QT: QT interval in an ECG (beginning of the QRS complex to end of
the T wave); QTc: Corrected QT interval in an ECG; RA: Accumulation ratio;
RPM: Revolutions per minute; SC: Subcutaneous; SD: Sprague-Dawley;
SE: Standard error; Sec: Second; Tmax: Time for maximum plasma concentration
of drug to be reached; TK: Toxicokinetic; U: Unit.
Competing interests
Financial competing interests
Claude Piché, Patricia Stotland, Myriam Triest, and Dolores Carballo are
employees of Locemia Solutions ULC, which provided the funding for the
studies. Fred Reno performed the work reported in this studies as a
consultant under contract with Locemia Solutions ULC. Patrick Normand and
Kevin McInally are employees of ITR Laboratories Canada Inc. Sherwin Silo is
an employee of CiToxLAB North America. ITR Laboratories Canada Inc and
CiToxLAB North America performed these studies under contract with
Locemia Solutions ULC.
Non-financial competing interests
All authors report no non-financial competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
PN was involved in all aspects of the 28-day intra-nasal toxicity study in rats and
dogs, including planning and conduct of the study, evaluation and interpretation
of the data, and drafting and final approval of the study report. KM was involved
in all aspects of the 28-day intra-nasal toxicity study in rats and dogs and the
single-dose intra-tracheal insufflation toxicity study in rats, including planning of
the studies, evaluation and interpretation of the data, and review of study reports.
SS was involved in all aspects of the single ocular tolerance study in New Zealand
white rabbits, including planning and conduct of the study, evaluation and
interpretation of the data, and drafting and final approval of the study report.
FR, CP, PS, MT, and DC contributed to all studies described in this manuscript,
including planning of the studies, writing the protocols, analysis and interpretation
of the data, and writing the study reports. All authors participated in writing this
manuscript, have reviewed it, and have approved the submission of the
manuscript for publication.
Authors’ information
Not applicable
Availability of data and materials
Not applicable

>>>section: references
References
1.
Cryer PE. Hypoglycaemia: the limiting factor in the glycaemic management
of Type I and Type II Diabetes. Diabetologia. 2002;45:937-48.
2.
Deary IJ. Symptoms of hypoglycaemia and effects on mental performance
and emotions. In: Frier BM, Fisher M, editors. Hypoglycaemia in clinical
diabetes. 2nd ed. Chicester, West Sussex, England: John Wiley & Sons
Limited; 2007. p. 25-48.
3.
Cryer PE, Davis SN, Shamoon H. Hypoglycemia in diabetes. Diabetes Care.
2003;26:1902-12.
4.
Leckie AM, Graham MK, Grant JB, Ritchie PJ, Frier BM. Frequency, severity,
and morbidity of hypoglycemia occurring in the workplace in people with
insulin-treated diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2005;28:1333-8.
5.
Zammitt NN, Frier BM. Hypoglycemia in type 2 diabetes: pathophysiology,
frequency, and effects of different treatment modalities. Diabetes Care.
2005;28:2948-61.
6.
UK Hypoglycemia Study Group. Risk of hypoglycaemia in types 1 and 2
diabetes: effects of treatment modalities and their duration. Diabetologia.
2007;50:1140-7.
7.
Cryer PE. The clinical problem of hypoglycemia in diabetes. In:
Hypoglycemia in diabetes: pathophysiology, prevalence, and prevention.
Alexandria, VA: American Diabetes Association; 2009. p. 1-15.
8.
American Diabetes Association. Standards of medical care in
diabetes-2015. Diabetes Care. 2015;38 suppl 1:S1-94.
9.
Jain MK. Components of biological membranes. In: Introduction to
biological membranes. New York: John Wiley & Sons; 1988. p. 10-50.
10.
GLUCACON (glucagon for injection, rDNA origin) Product Monograph.
Toronto, Ontario: Eli Lilly Canada Inc.; 2012 http://www.lilly.ca/en/pdf/
product-monograph/04_rglucagon-pm_9july2012.pdf. Accessed 26
September 2015.
11.
GLUCAGEN® and GLUCAGEN® Hypokit 1 mg (glucagon) Product
Monograph. Mississauga, Ontario: Novo Nordisk Canada Inc.; 2014.
http://www.paladin-labs.com/our_products/PM_GlucaGen_EN.pdf.
Accessed 26 September 2015.
12.
Root MA, Ellis J, Staub A. Effect of glucagon on insulin hypoglycemia. Proc
Soc Exp Biol Med. 1954;85:507-11.
13.
Eistrup C, Hjortkjaer RK, Pickersgill N, Virgo DM, Woolley AP. Glucagon
produced by recombinant DNA technology: repeated dose toxicity studies,
intravenous administration to CD rats and beagle dogs for four weeks.
Pharmacol Toxicol. 1993;73:103-8.
Reno et al. BMC Pharmacology and Toxicology  (2015) 16:29 Page 16 of 16
14. Merkus FW, Verhoef JC, Marttin E, Romeijn SG, van der Kuy PH,
Hermens WA, et al. Cyclodextrins in nasal drug delivery. Adv Drug
Deliv Rev. 1999;36:41-57.
15. Asai K, Morishita M, Katsuta H, Hosoda S, Shinomiya K, Noro M, et al. The
effects of water-soluble cyclodextrins on the histological integrity of the rat
nasal mucosa. Int J Pharm. 2002;246:25-35.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color figure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
Reno et al.BMC Pharmacology and Toxicology (2015)16:29
Page 7 of 16
Reno et al.BMC Pharmacology and Toxicology (2015)16:29
Page 8 of 16

>>>section: methods
Methods
The four toxicology studies reported here included the
following: a 28-day sub-chronic toxicology study in rats
evaluating the safety of GNP in solution at 0.1 and
0.2 mg/rat/day (approximately 0.4 and 0.8 mg/kg/day), a
28-day sub-chronic toxicology study in dogs that 
evaluated the safety of GNP in powder form at 2 and 4 mg
glucagon/dog/day (i.e., 20 mg and 40 mg GNP/dog/day,
approximately 0.2 and 0.4 mg/kg/day), an acute 
toxicology study in rats administered 0.5 mg GNP 
intra-tracheally (i.e., 0.05 mg glucagon), and a local tolerance
study in rabbits in which 30 mg GNP (i.e., 3 mg 
gluca-gon) was administered directly in the eye (Table 1). The
first three studies (the 28-day sub-chronic toxicology
studies in rats and dogs, and the acute toxicology study
in rats) were conducted at the facilities of ITR 
Laboratories Canada Inc, Baie d’Urfe, Québec, Canada, while
the last study (local tolerance study in rabbits) was
conducted at the facilities of CiToxLab North America,
Laval (Québec), Canada. The test species were chosen
because they are the species recommended for these
types of studies by the regulatory authorities.
The protocols for the studies conducted at the facilities
of ITR Laboratories Canada Inc were reviewed and
assessed by the Animal Care Committee (ACC) of ITR.
All animals used in these studies were cared for in 
accordance with the principles outlined in the current “Guide to
the Care and Use of Experimental Animals” as published
by the Canadian Council on Animal Care and the “Guide
for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals”, a National
Institutes of Health (NIH) publication. The studies did not
Reno et al. BMC Pharmacology and Toxicology  (2015) 16:29 Page 4 of 16
unnecessarily duplicate previous experiments. Procedures
involving the care and use of animals in the study
conducted at the facilities of CiToxLab North America
were reviewed and approved by the Institutional Animal
Care and Use Committee (IACUC) prior to conduct. 
During the study, the care and use of animals was conducted
in accordance with the principles outlined in the current
Guidelines published by the Canadian Council on Animal
Care and the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory
Animals, a National Research Council (NRC) publication.
The CiToxLAB North America facility is accredited by
the Canadian Council on Animal Care and AAALAC.
Sprague-Dawley Crl:CD (SD) rats (Rattus norvegicus)
and male New Zealand white rabbits (Oryctolagus
cuniculus) were obtained from Charles River Canada Inc.
(St-Constant, Quebec, Canada). Beagle dogs were obtained
from Marshall BioResources, Inc. (North Rose, New York,
USA). On arrival, all animals were weighed and subjected to
a detailed physical examination by the Clinical Veterinarian
to ensure satisfactory health status. Each animal was
uniquely identified. Animals were fed and housed using
standard protocols, and allowed an appropriate acclimation
period between receipt of animals and start of treatment.
Detailed descriptions of methodology used in these
studies are provided in the Supplement to this article
Additional file 1.

>>>section: fulltext
Reno et al. BMC Pharmacology and Toxicology  (2015) 16:29
DOI 10.1186/s40360-015-0026-9
RESEARCH ARTICLE
A novel nasal powder formulation of
glucagon: toxicology studies in animal
models
Frederick E. Reno1, Patrick Normand2, Kevin McInally2, Sherwin Silo3, Patricia Stotland4, Myriam Triest4,
Dolores Carballo4 and Claude Piché4*
Abstract
Background: Glucagon nasal powder (GNP), a novel intranasal formulation of glucagon being developed to
treat insulin-induced severe hypoglycemia, contains synthetic glucagon (10 % w/w), beta-cyclodextrin, and
dodecylphosphocholine. The safety of this formulation was evaluated in four studies in animal models.
Methods: The first study evaluated 28-day sub-chronic toxicology in rats treated intranasally with 1 and 2 mg of
GNP/day (0.1 and 0.2 mg glucagon/rat/day). The second study evaluated 28-day sub-chronic toxicology in dogs
administered 20 and 40 mg of formulation/dog/day (2 and 4 mg glucagon/dog/day) intranasally. A pulmonary
insufflation study assessed acute toxicology following intra-tracheal administration of 0.5 mg of GNP (0.05 mg
glucagon) to rats. Local tolerance to 30 mg of GNP (equivalent to 3 mg glucagon, the final dose for humans)
was tested through direct administration into the eyes of rabbits.
Results: There were no test article-related adverse effects on body weight and/or food consumption, ophthalmology,
electrocardiography, hematology, coagulation parameters, clinical chemistry, urinalysis, or organ weights, and no
macroscopic findings at necropsy in any study. In rats, direct intra-tracheal insufflation at a dose of 0.5 mg of GNP/rat
(0.05 mg glucagon/rat) did not result in adverse clinical, macroscopic, or microscopic effects. In dogs, the only adverse
findings following sub-chronic use were transient (<30 s) salivation and sneezing immediately post-treatment and mild
to moderate reversible histological changes to the nasal mucosa. Daily dosing over 28 days in rats resulted in mild to
moderate, unilateral or bilateral erosion/ulceration of the olfactory epithelium, frequently with minimal to mild, acute to
sub-acute inflammation of the lamina propria at the dorsal turbinates of the nasal cavity in 2/10 males and 3/10
females in the high-dose group (0.2 mg glucagon/day). These lesions resolved completely over 14 days. Histological
examination of tissues from both sub-chronic studies in dogs and rats revealed no microscopic findings. In rabbits,
clinical observations noted in the GNP-treated eye and/or surrounding areas included ≥1 of the following: clear
discharge, red conjunctiva, partial closure, and swelling of the peri-orbital area, which correlated with erythema and
edema noted during ocular observations and grading.
(Continued on next page)
Open Access
* Correspondence: claude.piche@locemia.com
4Locemia Solutions ULC., 8505 Dalton, Montreal, QC, Canada
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2015 Reno et al. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to
the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver
(http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated.
Reno et al. BMC Pharmacology and Toxicology  (2015) 16:29 Page 2 of 16
(Continued from previous page)
Discussion: The studies reported here revealed no safety concerns associated with GNP in animal models. Studies
published earlier have highlighted the local safety profile of intranasally administered cyclodextrins (a component of
GNP). The choline group, the phosphate group, and the saturated 12-carbon aliphatic chain that are present in the
dodecylphosphocholine excipient used in GNP are all present in the phospholipids and lecithins seen ubiquitously in
mammalian cell membranes and are unlikely to pose safety concerns; this notion is supported by several studies
conducted by the authors that revealed no safety concerns. Taken together, these results suggest that intranasal
delivery of GNP holds promise as a future rescue medication for use by caregivers to treat insulin-induced
hypoglycemic episodes in patients with type 1 or type 2 diabetes.
Conclusion: This novel drug product is well tolerated in animal models.
Keywords: Diabetes, Glucagon, Hypoglycemia, Insulin, Intranasal, Peptide hormones
Background
Diabetes mellitus has reached epidemic proportions in
much of the western world and is a serious and growing
public health concern in many developing economies.
Globally, there are approximately 285 million people
with diabetes and that number is expected to reach 438
million by 2030.
Diabetes complications are usually associated with
chronically elevated blood glucose levels, which result in
heart, kidney, and eye diseases, amputations, and 
neurological impairment. Unfortunately, there are very real
and serious complications associated with use of 
medications used to treat diabetes-related hyperglycemia. One
of the most common complications of treatment to
reduce blood sugar levels is hypoglycemia, most 
frequently seen in patients being treated with insulin (i.e., all
patients with type 1 diabetes as well as patients with type
2 diabetes on insulin), but also in patients with type 2
diabetes receiving insulin secretagogue (sulfonylurea and
meglitinides) treatment. Indeed, if it were not for the
barrier of hypoglycemia, people with diabetes could 
probably have normal blood glucose levels and thus avoid the
complications associated with hyperglycemia [1].
Depending on the severity of the episode, hypoglycemia
causes a wide range of physical problems ranging from
weakness, dizziness, sweating, and hunger to more serious
symptoms including blurred vision, behavior change,
seizures, coma and even death. In addition to the physical
effects of hypoglycemia, there are significant psychological
effects including fear of another episode, high levels of
anxiety, and low levels of overall happiness that adversely
affect glucose control and quality of life [2].
Based on reviews of the subject, patients with type 1
diabetes experience an average of one episode of severe
temporarily disabling hypoglycemia each year [3, 4].
Although persons with type 2 diabetes are generally less
susceptible to severe hypoglycemia, the incidence of
severe hypoglycemia is significant with annual incidence
rates varying from 0.02 to 0.35 episodes per patient per
year [5]. However, as the disease progresses, patients
with type 2 diabetes frequently show similar 
susceptibility to severe hypoglycemia as seen in patients with type
1 diabetes [6, 7].
According to the Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes
of the American Diabetes Association (ADA), severe
hypoglycemia in a conscious person should be treated by
the oral ingestion of 15-20 g carbohydrate, preferably as
glucose tablets or equivalent [8]. For severe hypoglycemia
in an unconscious individual in the home setting, the
recommended treatment is 1 mg glucagon by injection.
For severe hypoglycemia in an unconscious individual in
the presence of professional medical assistance and 
intravenous access, 10-25 g intravenous dextrose is 
recommended. In all cases, once the hypoglycemia has been
reversed, the patient should be given oral carbohydrates to
prevent repeated hypoglycemia.
Glucagon is a highly effective treatment for severe
hypoglycemia outside and within the hospital setting.
Because glucagon is unstable in solution, commercially
available emergency glucagon kits consist of lyophilized
glucagon powder that must be mixed with a diluent
immediately prior to injection. This procedure can be
complex, intimidating, and prone to potentially serious
errors, especially in an emergency situation for a 
care-giver, companion, or stranger who is not trained in
reconstitution and injection techniques.
Glucagon nasal powder (GNP; previously referred to
as AMG504-1) is a novel, nasally administered glucagon
powder formulation being developed for the treatment
of severe hypoglycemia, a commonly encountered 
life-threatening emergency in which the patient, typically an
insulin-using diabetic, requires third-party assistance to
correct the hypoglycemia. The drug is packaged within a
very simple and user-friendly, single-use, nasal powder
dosing device that delivers its entire contents into the
patient’s nose when it is activated by pushing on the
bottom of the dispenser (Fig. 1). The performance of the
device is patient-independent in that there is no need to
inhale (drug is absorbed from the nasal cavity) and the
device performs as expected regardless of the orientation
Reno et al. BMC Pharmacology and Toxicology  (2015) 16:29 Page 3 of 16
of the device (i.e., right side up or rotated 180°). This
product may simplify treatment of severe hypoglycemia
for non-medical caregivers of persons with diabetes.
GNP contains synthetic glucagon (10 % w/w) as well
as beta-cyclodextrin and dodecylphosphocholine (DPC).
Of the three ingredients in GNP, extensive safety and
toxicology data and a long history of clinical use have
been generated for glucagon and beta-cyclodextrin. The
third ingredient, DPC, contains a choline group, a 
phosphate group, and a saturated aliphatic chain that is 12
carbons in length. As all three moieties are present in
phospholipids and lecithins ubiquitous in mammalian
cell membranes [9], significant adverse effects associated
with DPC were not expected when it was chosen as the
excipient.
The toxicology program for GNP consists of three
components. The actual formulation (i.e., combination
of glucagon, beta-cyclodextrin, and DPC) selected for
clinical trials was studied to evaluate local and systemic
effects of the drug product. A second series of studies,
developed in accordance with the United States FDA’s
Guidance for Industry: Nonclinical Studies for the 
Development of Pharmaceutical Excipients, was conducted
to provide additional safety information and supplement
the safety profile of DPC. A third set of studies was
conducted to evaluate the in vitro cytotoxicity, skin
sensitization, and intra-cutaneous reactivity of the 
materials used in the actuator delivery device. We now report
the findings of four toxicology studies conducted in
animal models to evaluate the safety of the actual 
formulation of this product. The findings of the toxicology
studies with DPC and the materials used in the delivery
device are being reported separately.
Methods
The four toxicology studies reported here included the
following: a 28-day sub-chronic toxicology study in rats
evaluating the safety of GNP in solution at 0.1 and
0.2 mg/rat/day (approximately 0.4 and 0.8 mg/kg/day), a
28-day sub-chronic toxicology study in dogs that 
evaluated the safety of GNP in powder form at 2 and 4 mg
glucagon/dog/day (i.e., 20 mg and 40 mg GNP/dog/day,
approximately 0.2 and 0.4 mg/kg/day), an acute 
toxicology study in rats administered 0.5 mg GNP 
intra-tracheally (i.e., 0.05 mg glucagon), and a local tolerance
study in rabbits in which 30 mg GNP (i.e., 3 mg 
glucagon) was administered directly in the eye (Table 1). The
first three studies (the 28-day sub-chronic toxicology
studies in rats and dogs, and the acute toxicology study
in rats) were conducted at the facilities of ITR 
Laboratories Canada Inc, Baie d’Urfe, Québec, Canada, while
the last study (local tolerance study in rabbits) was
conducted at the facilities of CiToxLab North America,
Laval (Québec), Canada. The test species were chosen
because they are the species recommended for these
types of studies by the regulatory authorities.
The protocols for the studies conducted at the facilities
of ITR Laboratories Canada Inc were reviewed and
assessed by the Animal Care Committee (ACC) of ITR.
All animals used in these studies were cared for in 
accordance with the principles outlined in the current “Guide to
the Care and Use of Experimental Animals” as published
by the Canadian Council on Animal Care and the “Guide
for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals”, a National
Institutes of Health (NIH) publication. The studies did not
Reno et al. BMC Pharmacology and Toxicology  (2015) 16:29 Page 4 of 16
unnecessarily duplicate previous experiments. Procedures
involving the care and use of animals in the study
conducted at the facilities of CiToxLab North America
were reviewed and approved by the Institutional Animal
Care and Use Committee (IACUC) prior to conduct. 
During the study, the care and use of animals was conducted
in accordance with the principles outlined in the current
Guidelines published by the Canadian Council on Animal
Care and the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory
Animals, a National Research Council (NRC) publication.
The CiToxLAB North America facility is accredited by
the Canadian Council on Animal Care and AAALAC.
Sprague-Dawley Crl:CD (SD) rats (Rattus norvegicus)
and male New Zealand white rabbits (Oryctolagus
cuniculus) were obtained from Charles River Canada Inc.
(St-Constant, Quebec, Canada). Beagle dogs were obtained
from Marshall BioResources, Inc. (North Rose, New York,
USA). On arrival, all animals were weighed and subjected to
a detailed physical examination by the Clinical Veterinarian
to ensure satisfactory health status. Each animal was
uniquely identified. Animals were fed and housed using
standard protocols, and allowed an appropriate acclimation
period between receipt of animals and start of treatment.
Detailed descriptions of methodology used in these
studies are provided in the Supplement to this article
Additional file 1.
Results
Twenty-eight-day intra-nasal toxicity followed by a 14-day
recovery period in rats
Formulation analysis
The glucagon content in the test article formulation for
Day 1 and for Day 28 was 5.7 and 5.8 mg/mL, respectively,
therefore, within at least 2 % of the desired value of
5.7 mg glucagon/mL. The absence of glucagon was also
confirmed in both control articles on both Days 1 and 28.
Mortality
Placebo-control animals 1006B and 1518D were found
dead after dosing was performed on Days 13 and 15,
respectively. A necropsy of animal 1006B indicated the
cause of death was most likely physical trauma and not
related to placebo control as no clinical signs were
observed prior to the animal death. There were no gross
findings for animal 1518D and, as a toxicokinetic (TK)
animal, a microscopic examination was not performed.
There were no deaths in saline or test-article groups.
Clinical signs
There were no adverse clinical signs related to treatment
with GNP. All clinical signs noted were considered 
incidental and not related to the administration of GNP
since they were sporadic, infrequent, and/or present in
control animals at a similar frequency and/or incidence.
Body weight
There were no body weight changes related to treatment
with GNP. All body weight changes were considered
incidental and not related to the administration of GNP.
Food consumption
There were slight increases in food consumption for the
weekly periods between Days 8 and 15 and between
Days 15 and 22. However, these were observed in all
groups and were not considered treatment-related.
Ophthalmoscopy
No treatment-related findings were noted during the course
of this study and the observations recorded were incidental
in origin and to be expected in this type of animal.
Toxicokinetics
Levels of glucagon were below the lower limit of 
quanti-fication (LLOQ, 200 pg/mL) in all serum samples 
collected from rats in the control groups, and low- and
high-dose groups prior to dosing on Day 1. Following
the first intra-nasal (IN) administration on Day 1, only 4
of 12 animals in the low-dose group displayed levels of
glucagon above LLOQ while 12 of 12 animals in the
high-dose group displayed levels above LLOQ on at least
one occasion. The mean glucagon concentration levels
increased quickly in rat serum to reach peak levels
within 10 min and declined over the sampling interval
in both treated groups, but peak levels were higher in
the high-dose group. Following Day 1 administration,
mean systemic exposure (AUC0-t) to glucagon increased
with dose (8095 vs. 172,893 pg.min/mL, for the low- and
high-dose groups, respectively) and mean peak glucagon
was observed 10 min after dosing and increased with
dose (390 vs. 9961 pg/mL, for the low- and high-dose
groups, respectively) (Fig. 2, Table 2).
On Day 28, all samples collected from placebo-control
liquid and saline-control animals displayed undetectable
levels of glucagon with the exception of two samples at
20 min post-dose (animals 1016D, 8644 pg/mL, and
2011D, 45 pg/mL). Those two values are probably due
to variance of glucagon already produced in the body of
the rats since those animals were both dosed before any
treated animal; therefore, animals were deemed to have
been dosed correctly. Following 28 consecutive daily
dosings, all pre-dose samples collected from low- and
high-dose groups were below or close to the limit of
quantification indicating no accumulation, which is 
consistent with a fast systemic turnover of glucagon. After
Day 28 dosing, nine of 12 animals from the low-dose
group and all animals from the high-dose group
displayed levels above LLOQ on at least one occasion.
Mean AUC0-t and Cmax values were 43,036 pg.min/mL
and 988 pg/mL for the low-dose group, respectively, and
Reno et al. BMC Pharmacology and Toxicology  (2015) 16:29 Page 5 of 16
60,073 pg.min/mL and 2109 pg/mL for the high-dose
group, respectively (Fig. 3, Table 2). There were no
statistical differences between sexes.
Hematology, coagulation, clinical chemistry, and urinalysis
There were no adverse test-article related changes in
hematology, coagulation, clinical chemistry, and 
urinalysis parameters. A number of mean parameters differed
from control values, with/without statistical significance,
but the differences were independent of dose and sex or
were minor in magnitude (Table 3). Thus, they were
considered incidental and of no biological significance.
Organ weights
There was a slight increase in organ weights relative to
body weight in several organs (adrenals, brain, heart,
kidneys, lungs/trachea, ovaries, and thyroid/parathyroid)
in Group 1 female animals compared with all other
groups. However, these differences were considered 
incidental and of no biological significance.
Macroscopic findings
Soft dark red material surrounding the heart and moderate,
acute, multi-focal pulmonary intra-alveolar hemorrhage
and many dark red areas in all lung lobes were observed in
the placebo-control animal found dead (1006B). These
findings, most likely due to physical trauma, contributed to
the death of the animal. Since these observations were
present in a placebo-control animal, they were considered
incidental. Other observations were considered incidental
or spontaneous. All gross pathology findings from all other
main and recovery animals, regardless of experimental
Reno et al. BMC Pharmacology and Toxicology  (2015) 16:29 Page 6 of 16
group, were considered spontaneous or incidental because
of low incidence and inconsistency across control or
treated groups.
Microscopic findings
Moderate, acute, multi-focal pulmonary intra-alveolar
hemorrhage, mild mandibular lymph node sinusal 
con-gestion/hemorrhage, and mild, multi-focal acute thymic
hemorrhage were observed in the placebo-control animal
found dead (1006B). In comparison with the 
placebo-control and saline animals, GNP-related erosion/ulcer-
ation of the olfactory epithelium, frequently with minimal
to mild acute to sub-acute inflammation of the 
lamina propria, was noted bilaterally or unilaterally at the
dorsal turbinate of nasal cavity level 2, as a mild to
moderate finding in 2/10 males and 3/10 females of
Group 4 (high dose). Inflammation of the lamina
propria of the olfactory epithelium was considered
secondary to the erosion/ulceration of the olfactory
epithelium. These lesions were always noted at the
dorsal turbinate of the nasal cavity level 2, which suggested
site-specificity of GNP-related insult in the nasal cavity.
These lesions were not present in the recovery animals,
suggesting reversibility of these lesions.
In Group 4 recovery animals, findings included retinal
fold/rossette (1/10), cardiomyopathy (5/10), tubular 
baso-philia of the kidneys (2/10), fibrosis of the kidneys (1/10),
corticomedullary mineralization of the kidneys (5/10),
healed infarct of the kidneys (1/10), focal cell infiltrate of
the liver (1/10), focal necrosis of the liver (1/10), 
intra-alveolar hemorrhage of the lungs (3/10), increased 
cellular-ity of the mandibular lymph node (2/10), interstitial cell 
infiltrate of the prostate (1/5), inflammation of the prostate
associated with urothelial hyperplasia (1/5), cell debris 
overlying epidermal hyperplasia (1/10), extramedullary
hematopoiesis of the spleen (10/10), and hemorrhage of the
thymus (1/10). The incidence and severity of these findings
cannot be compared to control animals as there were no
concurrent control saline recovery animals. However, these
findings are common background lesions observed in 
Spra-gue-Dawley rats and were considered to be incidental or
procedure-related rather than test-item related.
All other histopathology findings in other tissues,
including those in placebo-control, saline, and low-dose
groups were considered incidental or spontaneous or
background and of no toxicological significance.
Twenty-eight-day intra-nasal toxicity followed by a 14-day
recovery period in beagle dogs
Formulation analysis
The mean glucagon content in the test-article devices on
both Days 1 and 28 was 2.1 mg, therefore within 10 % of
the desired value of 2 mg per device. The amount of 
glucagon on Days 1 and 28 was consistent; therefore,
Group 4: High dose
Female (N = 9) Male (N = 8) Female (N = 9)
8.19 (0.393) 8.49 (0.379)
8.26 (0.267)
144 (6.4)
147 (7.7)
144 (3.7)
0.44 (0.021) 0.47 (0.027)
0.45 (0.011)
54.3 (1.22)
55.1 (2.07)
54.7 (1.58)
17.5 (0.42)
17.3 (0.71)
17.4 (0.40)
323 (5.0)
313 (6.5)
319 (6.3)
901 (136.8) 864 (122.1)
821 (194.5)
1.76 (0.463) 1.83 (0.320)
1.66 (0.457)
0.143 (0.0363) 0.155 (0.0257) 0.136 (0.0363)
6.28 (2.144) 8.90 (2.046)
5.00 (1.472)
0.47 (0.114) 0.82 (0.264)
0.43 (0.140)
5.59 (1.997) 7.73 (2.029)
4.37 (1.432)
0.10 (0.027) 0.19 (0.080)
0.09 (0.039)
0.08 (0.017) 0.09 (0.027)
0.07 (0.033)
0.02 (0.011) 0.03 (0.012)
0.02 (0.010)
0.03 (0.027) 0.05 (0.022)
0.02 (0.011)
Female (N = 9) Male (N = 8) Female (N = 9)
13.5 (0.34)
13.6 (0.41)
13.7 (0.39)
16.2 (0.97)
16.1 (0.68)
16.2 (1.05)
Female (N = 10) Male (N = 10) Female (N = 10)
34 (14.3)
28 (7.1)
31 (9.9)
135 (44.6)
130 (26.9)
120 (49.3)
65 (15.5)
127 (30.3)
55 (12.9)
2.1 (0.21) (N = 3) 2.2 (−) (N = 1) 2.2 (0.29) (N = 4)
2.0 (0.453) 1.76 (0.288)
1.75 (0.313)
0.38 (0.108) 0.57 (0.203)
0.34 (0.088)
8.1 (2.19)
8.4 (2.41)
9.1 (1.37)
64 (3.5)
45 (2.5)
19 (1.5)
2.4 (0.17)
5.8 (1.01)
28 (5.5)
2.63 (0.093) 2.60 (0.077)
2.10 (0.224) 2.54 (0.269)
145 (2.1)
147 (1.4)
5.0 (0.47)
5.3 (0.60)
105 (1.6)
104 (1.7)
5 (2.4)
10 (3.8)
5.6 (0.90)
61 (2.0)
39 (1.7)
22 (2.4)
1.8 (0.24)
26 (2.0)
2.68 (0.075)
2.06 (0.213)
5.1 (0.40)
4.8 (0.26)
2.7 (0.53)
65 (4.5)
48 (5.0)
18 (2.0)
29 (3.0)
146 (1.4)
105 (1.3)
9 (6.7)
Reno et al. BMC Pharmacology and Toxicology  (2015) 16:29 Page 9 of 16
stability of glucagon throughout the 28 days at room
temperature was confirmed. There was no glucagon
present in any control article device on Day 1 or Day 28.
Efficiency of devices
Achieved powder concentrations of the devices are 
presented in Table 4.
During the initial part of the study, the amounts of
powder released from the devices appeared to be 
inconsistent, with several devices appearing to deliver less
than expected and some devices apparently weighing
more after discharge than before discharge. Following an
investigation, these irregular values for test article discharge
weights (i.e., delivery efficiency) were shown to be caused
by an electrostatic charge on some of the devices that 
interfered with the device weight values obtained pre-dosing.
The charge was removed by simply wiping each device with
a small amount of alcohol. The actual amount given to the
animals before the problem was discovered cannot be 
calculated accurately. However, since only a minimal amount
of powder was present in devices that were opened after
discharge, the animals were most likely given the correct
dose; therefore, the impact on the study was assumed to be
minimal. Also, as seen in Table 4, the placebo group was
more affected by the electrostatic charge than the treated
groups. As outlined in Table 4, the reported efficiency of
the devices was between 82.5 and 94.5 % without wiping
and between 92.8 and 99.5 % with wiping. However, 
efficiency values prior to implementation of corrective actions
cannot be completely accurate since we cannot determine
the exact amount discharged from the devices.
Mortality
There were no drug-related deaths in the study.
Clinical signs
With the exception of transient salivation and some
sneezing in most dogs immediately after IN dosing with
placebo powder or GNP, there were no 
treatment-related adverse clinical signs observed in this study.
All clinical signs noted were considered incidental
and not related to the administration of GNP since
they were sporadic, infrequent, and/or present in 
control animals at a similar frequency and/or incidence.
Body weight
There were no body weight changes related to treatment
with GNP. All body weight changes were considered 
incidental and not related to the administration of GNP.
Food consumption
Food consumption
was
findings
were noted on the
aCalculated using all values from the entire study including discharge weights
obtained before implementation of a device wiping procedure to correct the
adverse effect of device-related electrostatic charge on the analytical balance
bCalculated using values beginning April 8, 2011 (equivalent to study Day 10,
11, or 12 depending on the dog) after instituting a device wiping procedure
to remove electrostatic charge and thus resulting in accurate and expected
discharge weights
GNP.
Ophthalmoscopy
No treatment-related findings were noted during the
course of this study and the observations recorded
were incidental in origin and to be expected in this
type of animal.
Electrocardiography
No treatment-related
electrocardiograms.
Toxicokinetics
Mean uncorrected glucagon concentration-time profiles
of GNP on Day 1 are presented in Fig. 4. Glucagon
concentration levels were below the LLOQ, 200 pg/mL,
in all samples collected in the placebo-powder and
saline-control groups on Day 1. Endogenous glucagon
levels were observed in 11 of 12 dogs from GNP groups
(animals 3502B and 3603B had reported values < LLOQ
while animal 4001B had undetectable glucagon levels).
Following a single GNP IN dose, mean glucagon 
concentration levels increased quickly in dog serum to reach
peak levels within 10 min and declined over the 
sampling interval. Mean peak glucagon levels were similar
across GNP dose levels.
Mean uncorrected glucagon concentration-time profiles
of GNP on Day 28 are presented in Fig. 5. On Day 28, all
samples collected from placebo-control powder and
saline-control animals displayed glucagon levels < LLOQ
with the exception of four samples, one from the 
saline-control group at pre-dose (animal 2503, 211 pg/mL) and
three from the placebo-control powder group at pre-dose
and 20 min post-dosing (animal 1501, 229 pg/mL,
animal 1502, 355 pg/mL, and animal 1503, 201 pg/mL, 
respectively). On Day 28, following daily dosing for 28 
consecutive days, pre-dose samples collected from low- and
high-dose GNP groups generally displayed measurable
glucagon levels.
unaffected by treatment with
Reno et al. BMC Pharmacology and Toxicology  (2015) 16:29 Page 10 of 16
Reno et al. BMC Pharmacology and Toxicology  (2015) 16:29 Page 11 of 16
To comply with standard methodologies for 
endogenous compounds, a baseline correction was also applied
to correct for endogenous glucagon levels and TK
parameters were derived from corrected plasma 
concentration profiles. Baseline was defined as pre-dose values
observed on Day 1. With baseline correction, after a
single test-article administration on Day 1, the mean 
systemic exposures (AUC0-t) to glucagon were 213,385 and
148,561 pg.min/mL for the low- and high-dose groups,
respectively. Median peak glucagon concentration was
observed 10 min after dosing and increased with dose
(6984 vs. 7251 pg/mL, for low- and high-dose groups,
respectively). Following the last dose on Day 28, mean
AUC0-t (267,261 vs. 343,597 pg.min/mL for low- and
high-dose groups, respectively) and Cmax values (8684
vs. 13,171 pg/mL, for low- and high-dose groups,
respectively) increased with dose (Table 5).
Although baseline glucagon levels were different
between treatment groups, baseline levels were very
low in both groups compared with glucagon levels
observed post-dosing. These data suggest that animals
treated with the experimental IN glucagon 
formulation experienced glucagon exposures well in excess of
physiological levels. Consistent with the short half-life
of glucagon in serum, minimal accumulation was
observed following multiple GNP IN administrations
and there were no statistical differences between
sexes.
Hematology, coagulation, clinical chemistry, and urinalysis
There were no adverse test-article related changes in
hematology, coagulation, clinical chemistry, and 
urinalysis parameters. No effect was seen on blood glucose as
samples were taken prior to dosing with glucagon.
Any increases or decreases observed were all within
the reference range for that species and all differences
from the control values, with/without statistical 
significance, were independent of dose and were minor in
magnitude. Thus, they were considered to have no 
biological significance.
Organ weights
There were no prominent organ weight changes related
to GNP-dosed animals and all differences from the 
control group weights were considered incidental and of no
biological significance. A number of means differed from
the control values, without statistical significance, but
considering the inter-animal variability, they were
regarded as incidental or of no biological significance.
Macroscopic findings
There were findings of a dark area and/or pale 
discoloration in the right middle lung lobe of one main animal in
Group 2 and one main animal in Group 4, which was 
considered to be background or procedure-related following
the microscopic evaluation. All other macroscopic 
findings were considered to be incidental or spontaneous 
because they were of low incidence or occurred in control
and/or treated groups.
Microscopic findings
Minimal to moderate atrophy/degeneration of the 
olfactory epithelium (with/without sub-acute inflammation)
was observed in level 4 of the nasal cavity of 2/6 (1/3
males and 1/3 females) Group 1 (placebo-control powder),
0/6 Group 2 (saline control), all Group 3 (low dose), and
all Group 4 (high dose) animals. Since this finding was 
observed in Group 1, Group 3, and Group 4 animals, but
not in Group 2, it was considered treatment-related. There
was also an increase in the incidence and/or severity in
the test-article treated animals in comparison to the
Group 1 animals. Minimal atrophy/degeneration of the 
olfactory epithelium was also present in level 3 of the nasal
cavity of one Group 4 male (4002B). Atrophy/degener-
ation of the olfactory epithelium was not observed in 
recovery animals, which suggests reversibility of the finding.
Minimal to moderate sub-acute bronchioloalveolar
inflammation was observed in the lungs of 3/6 (2/3 males
and 1/3 females) Group 1, 4/6 (3/3 males and 1/3 females)
Group 2, all Group 3, and 4/6 (2/3 males and 2/3 females)
Group
4 animals. This finding was observed in both
Reno et al. BMC Pharmacology and Toxicology  (2015) 16:29 Page 12 of 16
control and treated animals and the mean severity grade
did not vary in relationship to dose level of the test article,
GNP. The sub-acute bronchioloalveolar inflammation of
the lungs correlated with the macroscopic finding of dark
and/or pale discoloration in one Group 2 and one Group
4 animal and was considered to be background or
procedure-related.
Minimal to mild focal hyperplasia or squamous 
meta-plasia of the respiratory epithelium was observed in the
carina of 3/6 (2/3 males and 1/3 females) Group 1, 3/6 (2/
3 males and 1/3 females) Group 2, 2/6 (0/3 males and 2/3
females) Group 3, and 4/6 (2/3 males and 2/3 females)
Group 4 animals. Focal hyperplasia or squamous 
metapla-sia of the respiratory epithelium was also present in one
Group 1 animal and one Group 4 animal after the 14-day
recovery period. This finding was observed in both the
control and treated groups with an increase in incidence
in Group 4 animals, but with no significant difference
in the severity between groups. Hyperplasia and 
squamous metaplasia of the respiratory epithelium were
regarded as adaptive responses following local 
irritation on the surface of the carinal epithelium and are
not uncommon with inhalation of inert and/or non-toxic
compounds.
All other microscopic findings were considered to be
incidental, spontaneous, background, or 
procedure-related because they were of low incidence or occurred
in control and/or treated groups.
Single-dose intra-tracheal insufflation toxicity in rats
Dose administration
The individual amounts of GNP delivered to Group 2
animals are presented in Table 6. Following dosing
accountability verification, the devices used for animals
2003B, 2005B, 2503B, and 2508D were determined to
have had low efficiencies. The efficiencies were 46, 24,
58, and 58 %, respectively. Therefore, it was decided to
replace these four animals with spare animals and dose
them with new devices. The data from these four
replacement animals (2103B, 2105B, 2603B, and 2608D)
are included in Table 6.
Mortality
There were no deaths over the course of the study.
Clinical signs
There were no adverse clinical signs related to treatment
with GNP. All clinical signs noted were considered 
incidental and not related to the administration of GNP.
Body weight
There were no body weight changes related to treatment
with GNP.
There were no changes in food consumption that were
considered related to treatment with GNP. All variations
were considered of normal biological variation.
Organ weights
There were no changes in organ weights that were clearly
related to treatment with GNP. Changes observed were
sporadic and considered incidental and of normal variation.
Macroscopic findings
A dark area was observed in the lungs of 5/10 (4/5 males
and 1/5 females) air-control (Group 1) rats and 2/10 (1/5
males and 1/5 females) GNP-treated (Group 2) rats at 
termination of the main study phase. The findings in the lungs
and all other macroscopic findings were considered to be
incidental, background, or procedure-related. These changes
were not observed at termination of the recovery period.
Microscopic findings
Minimal alveolar histiocytosis and minimal alveolar
hemorrhage were observed in the lungs of both 
air-control (Group 1) and GNP-treated (Group 2) rats. The
alveolar histiocytosis was considered a normal 
nonspecific pulmonary adaptive response associated with
phagocytosis and clearance of inhaled particulates. These
changes are commonly observed in inhalation studies,
including from air-control animals, and could be related to
inhalation of airborne particulates. The alveolar hemorrhage
Reno et al. BMC Pharmacology and Toxicology  (2015) 16:29 Page 13 of 16
often correlated with the macroscopic finding of dark area
and was considered to be procedure-related or background.
The histiocytosis and alveolar hemorrhage were also present
at the end of the 14-day recovery period. All other
microscopic findings were considered to be incidental
or spontaneous.
Single-dose ocular tolerance in rabbits
Mortality
Three male rabbits (1001, 1102, and 1003) were treated
with GNP. None of the test animals died during the
course of this study.
Clinical signs
Clinical observations noted in the GNP-treated eye
(left eye) and/or surrounding areas included one or more
of the following: clear discharge, red conjunctiva, partial
closure of the eye, and firm swelling of the periorbital area.
These observations correlated with erythema and
edema noted during ocular observations and grading,
and were associated with possible mechanical irritation
due to eyelid movements in presence of a solid powder in
the eyes. All other clinical signs were considered 
incidental and are common in laboratory-housed 
members of this species.
Body weight
There was no body weight change related to the dosing
administration of GNP. Body weights were measured for
general health assessment, and showed expected 
progressive increases during the study period.
Ocular observations and grading
All animals presented slight unilateral (left eye) ocular
findings related to the administration of GNP. In all cases,
the findings noted at all time points (1, 24, 48, and 72 h)
post-dosing, were limited to erythema (redness) and
edema (swelling) of the conjunctiva and the palpebral
membrane. These lesions were attributed to possible
mechanical irritation due to eyelid movements in presence
of solid powder in the eye since GNP was delivered to the
eye as dry powder.
One animal (1001) presented a minimal area of 
fluor-escein staining at 24 h post-treatment and none at the
other time points. Ocular grading sheets only indicated
a score of ‘1’ for the area of cornea involved with an
opacity score of ‘0’. The score value of ‘1’ was intended
for the area of ‘fluorescein staining’ following the 
observation after the fluorescein solution instillation for this
animal. This was considered related to a trauma to the
cornea during experimental procedures rather than a
treatment-related effect.
Macroscopic findings
No GNP-related macroscopic changes were observed at
necropsy. Animal 1102 presented a single, bilateral dark
red area at the nictitating membrane of the eyes. This
change was considered to be incidental and of no 
toxicological significance.
Discussion
The objective of these studies was to evaluate in animal
models the safety of GNP, a formulation of glucagon for
intra-nasal administration intended for the treatment of
severe hypoglycemia.
Intra-nasal administration of GNP for 28 consecutive
days at the estimated average dose rate of up to 2 mg
GNP/day (0.2 mg glucagon/day) was well tolerated by
rats. There were two deaths during the study, but they
were in the placebo-control group and a necropsy
indicated the deaths were most likely due to physical
trauma. There were no test-article related mortalities or
adverse clinical signs, and body weights, food 
consumption, ophthalmoscopy findings, and clinical pathology
parameters were unaffected by GNP. Adverse effects
were limited to local effects observed at the site of
administration at the high-dose only. Daily dosing over
the course of 28 days revealed no evidence of 
accumulation of glucagon in the serum and there were no 
gender-related trends in glucagon exposure parameters. Both on
Day 1 and Day 28, mean
AUC0-t and Cmax values
increased with dose. Daily dosing over the course of
28 days at the high-dose resulted in mild to moderate,
unilateral or bilateral erosion/ulceration of the olfactory
epithelium, frequently with minimal to mild acute to
sub-acute inflammation of the lamina propria, at the
dorsal turbinates of nasal cavity level 2, in 2/10 males
and 3/10 females of Group 4 (0.2 mg glucagon/day).
These GNP-related lesions showed complete resolution
following the 14-day recovery period suggesting the
adverse effects are reversible. The no-observed-effect
level was considered to be at the low dose of 1 mg
GNP/day (0.1 mg glucagon/day).
Dogs tolerated daily IN administration of GNP for 28
consecutive days at the estimated average dose up to
39.6 mg GNP/dog/day (4.0 mg glucagon/dog/day) without
any mortality. With the exception of transient salivation
and some sneezing in most dogs immediately after IN
dosing, there were no treatment-related adverse clinical
signs observed in this study. Body weights, food 
consumption, ophthalmoscopy, and electrocardiography data were
unaffected by the treatment in any test-article treated 
animals. There were also no adverse test-article related
changes in clinical pathology parameters. Daily dosing
over the course of 28 days revealed minimal accumulation
of glucagon in the serum and there were no 
gender-related trends in glucagon exposure parameters. With
Reno et al. BMC Pharmacology and Toxicology  (2015) 16:29 Page 14 of 16
baseline correction, after a single test-article 
administration on Day 1, the mean systemic exposures (AUC0-t) to
glucagon were 213,385 and 148,561 pg.min/mL for the
low- and high-dose groups, respectively. Median peak
glucagon concentration was observed 10 min after dosing
and increased with dose (6984 vs. 7251 pg/mL, for 
low-and high-dose groups, respectively). Following the last dose
on Day 28, mean AUC0-t (267,261 vs. 343,597 pg.min/mL
for low- and high-dose groups, respectively) and Cmax
values (8684 vs. 13,171 pg/mL, for low- and high-dose
groups, respectively) increased with dose. Although 
baseline glucagon levels were different between treatment
groups, baseline levels were very low in both groups 
compared with glucagon levels observed post-dosing. These
data suggest that animals treated with the experimental IN
glucagon formulation experienced glucagon exposures well
in excess of physiological levels. There were no test-article
related findings observed macroscopically. Microscopically,
mild to moderate atrophy/degeneration of the olfactory
epithelium was observed in the nasal cavity (level 4) of the
Group 1 (placebo-control powder), Group 3 (low dose;
20 mg/day GNP [2.0 mg/day glucagon]), and Group 4 (high
dose; 40 mg/day GNP [4.0 mg/day glucagon]) animals, with
an increase of the incidence and severity in Group 3 and
Group 4 animals. After a 14-day recovery period, this
treatment-related finding in the nasal cavity was no longer
present, suggesting reversibility of the finding.
A single intra-tracheal insufflation of GNP was well
tolerated by rats. The estimated average doses 
administered were 0.48 and 0.51 mg GNP (0.04 and 0.05 mg
glucagon) for males and females, respectively. There
were no changes observed in any of the parameters
evaluated in this study.
In the final study, male rabbits were treated with GNP
by a single ocular instillation using a powder dosing
device. There were no mortality or body weight changes
following GNP administration during the course of this
study. Clinical observations noted in the GNP-treated eye
(left eye; treated with 30 mg GNP [i.e., 3 mg glucagon])
and/or surrounding areas included one or more of the
following: clear discharge, red conjunctiva, partial closure
of the eye, and firm swelling of the periorbital area. These
observations correlated with erythema and edema noted
during ocular observations and grading. At all ocular
grading time points (1, 24, 48, and 72 h) post-dose, all 
animals presented slight unilateral (left eye) ocular findings
related to the administration of GNP. In all cases, the 
findings were limited to erythema and edema of the 
conjunctiva and the palpebral membrane. These lesions were
attributed to possible mechanical irritation due to eyelid
movements in presence of solid powder in the eye since
GNP was delivered to the eye as dry powder.
Glucagon has long been recognized for its wide safety
margin. Eli Lilly reports the median lethal IV dose at
300 mg/kg for mice and 38.6 mg/kg for rats [10] while
Novo Nordisk reports the LD50 (lethal dose, 50 %)
following IV or SC injection in rats and mice to range
from 100 to >200 mg/kg [11]. Daily administration of
glucagon for 6 months to rats (1 mg/rat/day) or rabbits
(1 mg/rabbit once or twice per day) did not cause
adverse clinical signs, had no effect on growth or weight
gain, and did not cause any pathological changes. The
only treatment effect reported was an increase in liver
glycogen content [12]. More recent data show daily IV
injection of glucagon for 4 weeks to rats (0, 0.2, 1.0, and
5.0 mg/kg/day) and dogs (0, 1.0, and 5.0 mg/kg/day) was
well tolerated [13]. There were no significant adverse
clinical signs in rats or dogs. Body weight and food 
consumption were unaffected. Liver weight was increased in
both species, but was not associated with any microscopic
changes. There was no evidence of any effect on fertility
after treatment of rats with up to 2 mg/kg BID with
animal-derived glucagon [10]. There was no evidence of
harm to the fetus after daily IV administration of 0.4, 2.0,
or 10.0 mg/kg (i.e., 100-200 times greater than human
exposure) of recombinant human glucagon to rats and
rabbits during the period of fetal organogenesis [11].
Regarding IN administration, considerable data on
cyclodextrins (CD), primarily on CDs that are much more
water soluble than β-CD (i.e., randomly methylated β-CD,
dimethyl β-CD, hydroxypropyl β-CD, α-CD), have been
generated and reviewed [14]. Overall, the local safety 
profile of IN CDs appears to be very good, with results 
indicating local effects on nasal morphology. In vitro ciliary
beat frequency and cytotoxicity profiles were generally
similar to those observed with saline control and much
less than those observed with bile salts or 0.01 % 
benzalk-onium chloride [14]. More recently, a paper was published
showing no evidence of tissue damage to rat nasal mucosa
following 5 min of in vivo exposure to 5 and 20 % 
hy-droxypropyl β-CD or to 1.5 % β-CD [15]. Testing of
higher concentrations of β-CD was not possible because
of β-CD’s very low water solubility, a factor that should
contribute to both the local and systemic safety of
intra-nasally administered β-CD.
The third ingredient, DPC, is not an approved 
excipient. DPC contains a choline group, a phosphate group,
and a saturated aliphatic chain that is 12 carbons in
length. All three moieties are present in phospholipids
and lecithins ubiquitous in mammalian cell membranes.
In addition, several in vitro and in vivo studies 
conducted by the authors have provided data that reveal
no safety concerns pertaining to DPC (manuscript in
development). Taken together, these results suggest that
IN delivery of GNP holds promise as a future rescue
medication for use by caregivers to treat 
insulin-induced hypoglycemic episodes in patients with type
1 or type 2 diabetes.
Reno et al. BMC Pharmacology and Toxicology  (2015) 16:29 Page 15 of 16
Conclusions
In conclusion, IN administration of large overdoses of
GNP to rats and dogs for 28 consecutive days was well
tolerated and resulted in only mild to moderate fully
reversible histological changes to nasal mucosa in some
animals. Direct deposition into the lungs of rats did not
result in any adverse findings, suggesting that inadvertent
pulmonary exposure to GNP is likely to be well tolerated.
In addition, a single ocular instillation using the intended
powder dosing device pre-filled with 30 mg GNP to
male New Zealand white rabbits was well tolerated,
with minimal ocular irritation limited to slight erythema
and edema localized to the conjunctiva and palpebral
membrane.
Additional file
Additional file 1: Manuscript supplement. (DOCX 191 kb)
Abbreviations
AAALAC: Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal
Care; ACC: Animal Care Committee; ADA: American Diabetes Association;
AUC: Area under the curve; BID: bis in die (twice daily); CD: Cyclodextrins;
Cmax: Maximum concentration (in the plasma); CI: Confidence intervals;
CV: Coefficient of variation; DCE: Detailed clinical examination;
DPC: Dodecylphosphocholine; ECG: Electrocardiogram; FDA: Food and Drug
Administration; fL: Femtoliter; g: Gram; GNP: Glucagon nasal powder;
IACUC: Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee; ID: Identification
number; IN: Intranasal; IV: Intravenous; KIU: Kallikrein inhibitor unit (of aprotinin);
L: Litre; LD50: Median lethal dose; LLOQ: Lower limit of quantitation; LSM: Least
square means; μmol: Micromole; mmol: Millimole; mL: Millilitre; NIH: National
Institutes of Health; NRC: National Research Council; pg: Picogram; PR: PR
interval (beginning of the P wave to beginning of QRS complex in an ECG);
QRS: RS complex in an ECG (represents rapid depolarization of right and left
ventricles); QT: QT interval in an ECG (beginning of the QRS complex to end of
the T wave); QTc: Corrected QT interval in an ECG; RA: Accumulation ratio;
RPM: Revolutions per minute; SC: Subcutaneous; SD: Sprague-Dawley;
SE: Standard error; Sec: Second; Tmax: Time for maximum plasma concentration
of drug to be reached; TK: Toxicokinetic; U: Unit.
Competing interests
Financial competing interests
Claude Piché, Patricia Stotland, Myriam Triest, and Dolores Carballo are
employees of Locemia Solutions ULC, which provided the funding for the
studies. Fred Reno performed the work reported in this studies as a
consultant under contract with Locemia Solutions ULC. Patrick Normand and
Kevin McInally are employees of ITR Laboratories Canada Inc. Sherwin Silo is
an employee of CiToxLAB North America. ITR Laboratories Canada Inc and
CiToxLAB North America performed these studies under contract with
Locemia Solutions ULC.
Non-financial competing interests
All authors report no non-financial competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
PN was involved in all aspects of the 28-day intra-nasal toxicity study in rats and
dogs, including planning and conduct of the study, evaluation and interpretation
of the data, and drafting and final approval of the study report. KM was involved
in all aspects of the 28-day intra-nasal toxicity study in rats and dogs and the
single-dose intra-tracheal insufflation toxicity study in rats, including planning of
the studies, evaluation and interpretation of the data, and review of study reports.
SS was involved in all aspects of the single ocular tolerance study in New Zealand
white rabbits, including planning and conduct of the study, evaluation and
interpretation of the data, and drafting and final approval of the study report.
FR, CP, PS, MT, and DC contributed to all studies described in this manuscript,
including planning of the studies, writing the protocols, analysis and interpretation
of the data, and writing the study reports. All authors participated in writing this
manuscript, have reviewed it, and have approved the submission of the
manuscript for publication.
Authors’ information
Not applicable
Availability of data and materials
Not applicable
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Dominic Poulin, BSc, GradDipTox, for his oversight in the
conduct of the study, evaluation and interpretation of the data, and
preparation of the study report for the single-dose intra-tracheal insufflation
toxicity in rats trial.
Assistance in the preparation of this manuscript was provided by
Roopashree Dwarakanath, PhD, Prasad Kulkarni, PhD, CMPP, and David
Segarnick, PhD, of MedEvoke, High Bridge, New Jersey, USA, and was funded
by Locemia Solutions ULC, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
Author details
1130 Macaw Lane, Merritt Island, FL 32952, USA. 2ITR Laboratories Canada Inc.
(ITR), 19601 Clark Graham Blvd, Baie d’Urfe, Quebec, Canada. 3CiToxLAB
North America, 445 Armand-Frappier Blvd, Laval, Québec, Canada. 4Locemia
Solutions ULC., 8505 Dalton, Montreal, QC, Canada.
Received: 9 May 2015 Accepted: 21 September 2015
References
1.
Cryer PE. Hypoglycaemia: the limiting factor in the glycaemic management
of Type I and Type II Diabetes. Diabetologia. 2002;45:937-48.
2.
Deary IJ. Symptoms of hypoglycaemia and effects on mental performance
and emotions. In: Frier BM, Fisher M, editors. Hypoglycaemia in clinical
diabetes. 2nd ed. Chicester, West Sussex, England: John Wiley & Sons
Limited; 2007. p. 25-48.
3.
Cryer PE, Davis SN, Shamoon H. Hypoglycemia in diabetes. Diabetes Care.
2003;26:1902-12.
4.
Leckie AM, Graham MK, Grant JB, Ritchie PJ, Frier BM. Frequency, severity,
and morbidity of hypoglycemia occurring in the workplace in people with
insulin-treated diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2005;28:1333-8.
5.
Zammitt NN, Frier BM. Hypoglycemia in type 2 diabetes: pathophysiology,
frequency, and effects of different treatment modalities. Diabetes Care.
2005;28:2948-61.
6.
UK Hypoglycemia Study Group. Risk of hypoglycaemia in types 1 and 2
diabetes: effects of treatment modalities and their duration. Diabetologia.
2007;50:1140-7.
7.
Cryer PE. The clinical problem of hypoglycemia in diabetes. In:
Hypoglycemia in diabetes: pathophysiology, prevalence, and prevention.
Alexandria, VA: American Diabetes Association; 2009. p. 1-15.
8.
American Diabetes Association. Standards of medical care in
diabetes-2015. Diabetes Care. 2015;38 suppl 1:S1-94.
9.
Jain MK. Components of biological membranes. In: Introduction to
biological membranes. New York: John Wiley & Sons; 1988. p. 10-50.
10.
GLUCACON (glucagon for injection, rDNA origin) Product Monograph.
Toronto, Ontario: Eli Lilly Canada Inc.; 2012 http://www.lilly.ca/en/pdf/
product-monograph/04_rglucagon-pm_9july2012.pdf. Accessed 26
September 2015.
11.
GLUCAGEN® and GLUCAGEN® Hypokit 1 mg (glucagon) Product
Monograph. Mississauga, Ontario: Novo Nordisk Canada Inc.; 2014.
http://www.paladin-labs.com/our_products/PM_GlucaGen_EN.pdf.
Accessed 26 September 2015.
12.
Root MA, Ellis J, Staub A. Effect of glucagon on insulin hypoglycemia. Proc
Soc Exp Biol Med. 1954;85:507-11.
13.
Eistrup C, Hjortkjaer RK, Pickersgill N, Virgo DM, Woolley AP. Glucagon
produced by recombinant DNA technology: repeated dose toxicity studies,
intravenous administration to CD rats and beagle dogs for four weeks.
Pharmacol Toxicol. 1993;73:103-8.
Reno et al. BMC Pharmacology and Toxicology  (2015) 16:29 Page 16 of 16
14. Merkus FW, Verhoef JC, Marttin E, Romeijn SG, van der Kuy PH,
Hermens WA, et al. Cyclodextrins in nasal drug delivery. Adv Drug
Deliv Rev. 1999;36:41-57.
15. Asai K, Morishita M, Katsuta H, Hosoda S, Shinomiya K, Noro M, et al. The
effects of water-soluble cyclodextrins on the histological integrity of the rat
nasal mucosa. Int J Pharm. 2002;246:25-35.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color figure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
Reno et al.BMC Pharmacology and Toxicology (2015)16:29
Page 7 of 16
Reno et al.BMC Pharmacology and Toxicology (2015)16:29
Page 8 of 16

>>>section: acknowledgements
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Dominic Poulin, BSc, GradDipTox, for his oversight in the
conduct of the study, evaluation and interpretation of the data, and
preparation of the study report for the single-dose intra-tracheal insufflation
toxicity in rats trial.
Assistance in the preparation of this manuscript was provided by
Roopashree Dwarakanath, PhD, Prasad Kulkarni, PhD, CMPP, and David
Segarnick, PhD, of MedEvoke, High Bridge, New Jersey, USA, and was funded
by Locemia Solutions ULC, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
Author details
1130 Macaw Lane, Merritt Island, FL 32952, USA. 2ITR Laboratories Canada Inc.
(ITR), 19601 Clark Graham Blvd, Baie d’Urfe, Quebec, Canada. 3CiToxLAB
North America, 445 Armand-Frappier Blvd, Laval, Québec, Canada. 4Locemia
Solutions ULC., 8505 Dalton, Montreal, QC, Canada.
Received: 9 May 2015 Accepted: 21 September 2015

>>>section: abstract
Abstract
Background: Glucagon nasal powder (GNP), a novel intranasal formulation of glucagon being developed to
treat insulin-induced severe hypoglycemia, contains synthetic glucagon (10 % w/w), beta-cyclodextrin, and
dodecylphosphocholine. The safety of this formulation was evaluated in four studies in animal models.
Methods: The first study evaluated 28-day sub-chronic toxicology in rats treated intranasally with 1 and 2 mg of
GNP/day (0.1 and 0.2 mg glucagon/rat/day). The second study evaluated 28-day sub-chronic toxicology in dogs
administered 20 and 40 mg of formulation/dog/day (2 and 4 mg glucagon/dog/day) intranasally. A pulmonary
insufflation study assessed acute toxicology following intra-tracheal administration of 0.5 mg of GNP (0.05 mg
glucagon) to rats. Local tolerance to 30 mg of GNP (equivalent to 3 mg glucagon, the final dose for humans)
was tested through direct administration into the eyes of rabbits.
Results: There were no test article-related adverse effects on body weight and/or food consumption, ophthalmology,
electrocardiography, hematology, coagulation parameters, clinical chemistry, urinalysis, or organ weights, and no
macroscopic findings at necropsy in any study. In rats, direct intra-tracheal insufflation at a dose of 0.5 mg of GNP/rat
(0.05 mg glucagon/rat) did not result in adverse clinical, macroscopic, or microscopic effects. In dogs, the only adverse
findings following sub-chronic use were transient (<30 s) salivation and sneezing immediately post-treatment and mild
to moderate reversible histological changes to the nasal mucosa. Daily dosing over 28 days in rats resulted in mild to
moderate, unilateral or bilateral erosion/ulceration of the olfactory epithelium, frequently with minimal to mild, acute to
sub-acute inflammation of the lamina propria at the dorsal turbinates of the nasal cavity in 2/10 males and 3/10
females in the high-dose group (0.2 mg glucagon/day). These lesions resolved completely over 14 days. Histological
examination of tissues from both sub-chronic studies in dogs and rats revealed no microscopic findings. In rabbits,
clinical observations noted in the GNP-treated eye and/or surrounding areas included ≥1 of the following: clear
discharge, red conjunctiva, partial closure, and swelling of the peri-orbital area, which correlated with erythema and
edema noted during ocular observations and grading.
(Continued on next page)
Open Access
* Correspondence: claude.piche@locemia.com
4Locemia Solutions ULC., 8505 Dalton, Montreal, QC, Canada
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2015 Reno et al. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to
the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver
(http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated.
Reno et al. BMC Pharmacology and Toxicology  (2015) 16:29 Page 2 of 16
(Continued from previous page)
Discussion: The studies reported here revealed no safety concerns associated with GNP in animal models. Studies
published earlier have highlighted the local safety profile of intranasally administered cyclodextrins (a component of
GNP). The choline group, the phosphate group, and the saturated 12-carbon aliphatic chain that are present in the
dodecylphosphocholine excipient used in GNP are all present in the phospholipids and lecithins seen ubiquitously in
mammalian cell membranes and are unlikely to pose safety concerns; this notion is supported by several studies
conducted by the authors that revealed no safety concerns. Taken together, these results suggest that intranasal
delivery of GNP holds promise as a future rescue medication for use by caregivers to treat insulin-induced
hypoglycemic episodes in patients with type 1 or type 2 diabetes.

>>>section: discussion
Discussion
The objective of these studies was to evaluate in animal
models the safety of GNP, a formulation of glucagon for
intra-nasal administration intended for the treatment of
severe hypoglycemia.
Intra-nasal administration of GNP for 28 consecutive
days at the estimated average dose rate of up to 2 mg
GNP/day (0.2 mg glucagon/day) was well tolerated by
rats. There were two deaths during the study, but they
were in the placebo-control group and a necropsy
indicated the deaths were most likely due to physical
trauma. There were no test-article related mortalities or
adverse clinical signs, and body weights, food 
consumption, ophthalmoscopy findings, and clinical pathology
parameters were unaffected by GNP. Adverse effects
were limited to local effects observed at the site of
administration at the high-dose only. Daily dosing over
the course of 28 days revealed no evidence of 
accumulation of glucagon in the serum and there were no 
gender-related trends in glucagon exposure parameters. Both on
Day 1 and Day 28, mean
AUC0-t and Cmax values
increased with dose. Daily dosing over the course of
28 days at the high-dose resulted in mild to moderate,
unilateral or bilateral erosion/ulceration of the olfactory
epithelium, frequently with minimal to mild acute to
sub-acute inflammation of the lamina propria, at the
dorsal turbinates of nasal cavity level 2, in 2/10 males
and 3/10 females of Group 4 (0.2 mg glucagon/day).
These GNP-related lesions showed complete resolution
following the 14-day recovery period suggesting the
adverse effects are reversible. The no-observed-effect
level was considered to be at the low dose of 1 mg
GNP/day (0.1 mg glucagon/day).
Dogs tolerated daily IN administration of GNP for 28
consecutive days at the estimated average dose up to
39.6 mg GNP/dog/day (4.0 mg glucagon/dog/day) without
any mortality. With the exception of transient salivation
and some sneezing in most dogs immediately after IN
dosing, there were no treatment-related adverse clinical
signs observed in this study. Body weights, food 
consumption, ophthalmoscopy, and electrocardiography data were
unaffected by the treatment in any test-article treated 
animals. There were also no adverse test-article related
changes in clinical pathology parameters. Daily dosing
over the course of 28 days revealed minimal accumulation
of glucagon in the serum and there were no 
gender-related trends in glucagon exposure parameters. With
Reno et al. BMC Pharmacology and Toxicology  (2015) 16:29 Page 14 of 16
baseline correction, after a single test-article 
administration on Day 1, the mean systemic exposures (AUC0-t) to
glucagon were 213,385 and 148,561 pg.min/mL for the
low- and high-dose groups, respectively. Median peak
glucagon concentration was observed 10 min after dosing
and increased with dose (6984 vs. 7251 pg/mL, for 
low-and high-dose groups, respectively). Following the last dose
on Day 28, mean AUC0-t (267,261 vs. 343,597 pg.min/mL
for low- and high-dose groups, respectively) and Cmax
values (8684 vs. 13,171 pg/mL, for low- and high-dose
groups, respectively) increased with dose. Although 
baseline glucagon levels were different between treatment
groups, baseline levels were very low in both groups 
compared with glucagon levels observed post-dosing. These
data suggest that animals treated with the experimental IN
glucagon formulation experienced glucagon exposures well
in excess of physiological levels. There were no test-article
related findings observed macroscopically. Microscopically,
mild to moderate atrophy/degeneration of the olfactory
epithelium was observed in the nasal cavity (level 4) of the
Group 1 (placebo-control powder), Group 3 (low dose;
20 mg/day GNP [2.0 mg/day glucagon]), and Group 4 (high
dose; 40 mg/day GNP [4.0 mg/day glucagon]) animals, with
an increase of the incidence and severity in Group 3 and
Group 4 animals. After a 14-day recovery period, this
treatment-related finding in the nasal cavity was no longer
present, suggesting reversibility of the finding.
A single intra-tracheal insufflation of GNP was well
tolerated by rats. The estimated average doses 
administered were 0.48 and 0.51 mg GNP (0.04 and 0.05 mg
glucagon) for males and females, respectively. There
were no changes observed in any of the parameters
evaluated in this study.
In the final study, male rabbits were treated with GNP
by a single ocular instillation using a powder dosing
device. There were no mortality or body weight changes
following GNP administration during the course of this
study. Clinical observations noted in the GNP-treated eye
(left eye; treated with 30 mg GNP [i.e., 3 mg glucagon])
and/or surrounding areas included one or more of the
following: clear discharge, red conjunctiva, partial closure
of the eye, and firm swelling of the periorbital area. These
observations correlated with erythema and edema noted
during ocular observations and grading. At all ocular
grading time points (1, 24, 48, and 72 h) post-dose, all 
animals presented slight unilateral (left eye) ocular findings
related to the administration of GNP. In all cases, the 
findings were limited to erythema and edema of the 
conjunctiva and the palpebral membrane. These lesions were
attributed to possible mechanical irritation due to eyelid
movements in presence of solid powder in the eye since
GNP was delivered to the eye as dry powder.
Glucagon has long been recognized for its wide safety
margin. Eli Lilly reports the median lethal IV dose at
300 mg/kg for mice and 38.6 mg/kg for rats [10] while
Novo Nordisk reports the LD50 (lethal dose, 50 %)
following IV or SC injection in rats and mice to range
from 100 to >200 mg/kg [11]. Daily administration of
glucagon for 6 months to rats (1 mg/rat/day) or rabbits
(1 mg/rabbit once or twice per day) did not cause
adverse clinical signs, had no effect on growth or weight
gain, and did not cause any pathological changes. The
only treatment effect reported was an increase in liver
glycogen content [12]. More recent data show daily IV
injection of glucagon for 4 weeks to rats (0, 0.2, 1.0, and
5.0 mg/kg/day) and dogs (0, 1.0, and 5.0 mg/kg/day) was
well tolerated [13]. There were no significant adverse
clinical signs in rats or dogs. Body weight and food 
consumption were unaffected. Liver weight was increased in
both species, but was not associated with any microscopic
changes. There was no evidence of any effect on fertility
after treatment of rats with up to 2 mg/kg BID with
animal-derived glucagon [10]. There was no evidence of
harm to the fetus after daily IV administration of 0.4, 2.0,
or 10.0 mg/kg (i.e., 100-200 times greater than human
exposure) of recombinant human glucagon to rats and
rabbits during the period of fetal organogenesis [11].
Regarding IN administration, considerable data on
cyclodextrins (CD), primarily on CDs that are much more
water soluble than β-CD (i.e., randomly methylated β-CD,
dimethyl β-CD, hydroxypropyl β-CD, α-CD), have been
generated and reviewed [14]. Overall, the local safety 
profile of IN CDs appears to be very good, with results 
indicating local effects on nasal morphology. In vitro ciliary
beat frequency and cytotoxicity profiles were generally
similar to those observed with saline control and much
less than those observed with bile salts or 0.01 % 
benzalk-onium chloride [14]. More recently, a paper was published
showing no evidence of tissue damage to rat nasal mucosa
following 5 min of in vivo exposure to 5 and 20 % 
hydroxypropyl β-CD or to 1.5 % β-CD [15]. Testing of
higher concentrations of β-CD was not possible because
of β-CD’s very low water solubility, a factor that should
contribute to both the local and systemic safety of
intra-nasally administered β-CD.
The third ingredient, DPC, is not an approved 
excipient. DPC contains a choline group, a phosphate group,
and a saturated aliphatic chain that is 12 carbons in
length. All three moieties are present in phospholipids
and lecithins ubiquitous in mammalian cell membranes.
In addition, several in vitro and in vivo studies 
conducted by the authors have provided data that reveal
no safety concerns pertaining to DPC (manuscript in
development). Taken together, these results suggest that
IN delivery of GNP holds promise as a future rescue
medication for use by caregivers to treat 
insulin-induced hypoglycemic episodes in patients with type
1 or type 2 diabetes.
Reno et al. BMC Pharmacology and Toxicology  (2015) 16:29 Page 15 of 16

>>>section: results
Results
Twenty-eight-day intra-nasal toxicity followed by a 14-day
recovery period in rats
Formulation analysis
The glucagon content in the test article formulation for
Day 1 and for Day 28 was 5.7 and 5.8 mg/mL, respectively,
therefore, within at least 2 % of the desired value of
5.7 mg glucagon/mL. The absence of glucagon was also
confirmed in both control articles on both Days 1 and 28.
Mortality
Placebo-control animals 1006B and 1518D were found
dead after dosing was performed on Days 13 and 15,
respectively. A necropsy of animal 1006B indicated the
cause of death was most likely physical trauma and not
related to placebo control as no clinical signs were
observed prior to the animal death. There were no gross
findings for animal 1518D and, as a toxicokinetic (TK)
animal, a microscopic examination was not performed.
There were no deaths in saline or test-article groups.
Clinical signs
There were no adverse clinical signs related to treatment
with GNP. All clinical signs noted were considered 
incidental and not related to the administration of GNP
since they were sporadic, infrequent, and/or present in
control animals at a similar frequency and/or incidence.
Body weight
There were no body weight changes related to treatment
with GNP. All body weight changes were considered
incidental and not related to the administration of GNP.
Food consumption
There were slight increases in food consumption for the
weekly periods between Days 8 and 15 and between
Days 15 and 22. However, these were observed in all
groups and were not considered treatment-related.
Ophthalmoscopy
No treatment-related findings were noted during the course
of this study and the observations recorded were incidental
in origin and to be expected in this type of animal.
Toxicokinetics
Levels of glucagon were below the lower limit of 
quantification (LLOQ, 200 pg/mL) in all serum samples 
collected from rats in the control groups, and low- and
high-dose groups prior to dosing on Day 1. Following
the first intra-nasal (IN) administration on Day 1, only 4
of 12 animals in the low-dose group displayed levels of
glucagon above LLOQ while 12 of 12 animals in the
high-dose group displayed levels above LLOQ on at least
one occasion. The mean glucagon concentration levels
increased quickly in rat serum to reach peak levels
within 10 min and declined over the sampling interval
in both treated groups, but peak levels were higher in
the high-dose group. Following Day 1 administration,
mean systemic exposure (AUC0-t) to glucagon increased
with dose (8095 vs. 172,893 pg.min/mL, for the low- and
high-dose groups, respectively) and mean peak glucagon
was observed 10 min after dosing and increased with
dose (390 vs. 9961 pg/mL, for the low- and high-dose
groups, respectively) (Fig. 2, Table 2).
On Day 28, all samples collected from placebo-control
liquid and saline-control animals displayed undetectable
levels of glucagon with the exception of two samples at
20 min post-dose (animals 1016D, 8644 pg/mL, and
2011D, 45 pg/mL). Those two values are probably due
to variance of glucagon already produced in the body of
the rats since those animals were both dosed before any
treated animal; therefore, animals were deemed to have
been dosed correctly. Following 28 consecutive daily
dosings, all pre-dose samples collected from low- and
high-dose groups were below or close to the limit of
quantification indicating no accumulation, which is 
consistent with a fast systemic turnover of glucagon. After
Day 28 dosing, nine of 12 animals from the low-dose
group and all animals from the high-dose group
displayed levels above LLOQ on at least one occasion.
Mean AUC0-t and Cmax values were 43,036 pg.min/mL
and 988 pg/mL for the low-dose group, respectively, and
Reno et al. BMC Pharmacology and Toxicology  (2015) 16:29 Page 5 of 16
60,073 pg.min/mL and 2109 pg/mL for the high-dose
group, respectively (Fig. 3, Table 2). There were no
statistical differences between sexes.
Hematology, coagulation, clinical chemistry, and urinalysis
There were no adverse test-article related changes in
hematology, coagulation, clinical chemistry, and 
urinalysis parameters. A number of mean parameters differed
from control values, with/without statistical significance,
but the differences were independent of dose and sex or
were minor in magnitude (Table 3). Thus, they were
considered incidental and of no biological significance.
Organ weights
There was a slight increase in organ weights relative to
body weight in several organs (adrenals, brain, heart,
kidneys, lungs/trachea, ovaries, and thyroid/parathyroid)
in Group 1 female animals compared with all other
groups. However, these differences were considered 
incidental and of no biological significance.
Macroscopic findings
Soft dark red material surrounding the heart and moderate,
acute, multi-focal pulmonary intra-alveolar hemorrhage
and many dark red areas in all lung lobes were observed in
the placebo-control animal found dead (1006B). These
findings, most likely due to physical trauma, contributed to
the death of the animal. Since these observations were
present in a placebo-control animal, they were considered
incidental. Other observations were considered incidental
or spontaneous. All gross pathology findings from all other
main and recovery animals, regardless of experimental
Reno et al. BMC Pharmacology and Toxicology  (2015) 16:29 Page 6 of 16
group, were considered spontaneous or incidental because
of low incidence and inconsistency across control or
treated groups.
Microscopic findings
Moderate, acute, multi-focal pulmonary intra-alveolar
hemorrhage, mild mandibular lymph node sinusal 
con-gestion/hemorrhage, and mild, multi-focal acute thymic
hemorrhage were observed in the placebo-control animal
found dead (1006B). In comparison with the 
placebo-control and saline animals, GNP-related erosion/ulcer-
ation of the olfactory epithelium, frequently with minimal
to mild acute to sub-acute inflammation of the 
lamina propria, was noted bilaterally or unilaterally at the
dorsal turbinate of nasal cavity level 2, as a mild to
moderate finding in 2/10 males and 3/10 females of
Group 4 (high dose). Inflammation of the lamina
propria of the olfactory epithelium was considered
secondary to the erosion/ulceration of the olfactory
epithelium. These lesions were always noted at the
dorsal turbinate of the nasal cavity level 2, which suggested
site-specificity of GNP-related insult in the nasal cavity.
These lesions were not present in the recovery animals,
suggesting reversibility of these lesions.
In Group 4 recovery animals, findings included retinal
fold/rossette (1/10), cardiomyopathy (5/10), tubular 
baso-philia of the kidneys (2/10), fibrosis of the kidneys (1/10),
corticomedullary mineralization of the kidneys (5/10),
healed infarct of the kidneys (1/10), focal cell infiltrate of
the liver (1/10), focal necrosis of the liver (1/10), 
intra-alveolar hemorrhage of the lungs (3/10), increased 
cellular-ity of the mandibular lymph node (2/10), interstitial cell 
infiltrate of the prostate (1/5), inflammation of the prostate
associated with urothelial hyperplasia (1/5), cell debris 
overlying epidermal hyperplasia (1/10), extramedullary
hematopoiesis of the spleen (10/10), and hemorrhage of the
thymus (1/10). The incidence and severity of these findings
cannot be compared to control animals as there were no
concurrent control saline recovery animals. However, these
findings are common background lesions observed in 
Spra-gue-Dawley rats and were considered to be incidental or
procedure-related rather than test-item related.
All other histopathology findings in other tissues,
including those in placebo-control, saline, and low-dose
groups were considered incidental or spontaneous or
background and of no toxicological significance.
Twenty-eight-day intra-nasal toxicity followed by a 14-day
recovery period in beagle dogs
Formulation analysis
The mean glucagon content in the test-article devices on
both Days 1 and 28 was 2.1 mg, therefore within 10 % of
the desired value of 2 mg per device. The amount of 
glucagon on Days 1 and 28 was consistent; therefore,
Group 4: High dose
Female (N = 9) Male (N = 8) Female (N = 9)
8.19 (0.393) 8.49 (0.379)
8.26 (0.267)
144 (6.4)
147 (7.7)
144 (3.7)
0.44 (0.021) 0.47 (0.027)
0.45 (0.011)
54.3 (1.22)
55.1 (2.07)
54.7 (1.58)
17.5 (0.42)
17.3 (0.71)
17.4 (0.40)
323 (5.0)
313 (6.5)
319 (6.3)
901 (136.8) 864 (122.1)
821 (194.5)
1.76 (0.463) 1.83 (0.320)
1.66 (0.457)
0.143 (0.0363) 0.155 (0.0257) 0.136 (0.0363)
6.28 (2.144) 8.90 (2.046)
5.00 (1.472)
0.47 (0.114) 0.82 (0.264)
0.43 (0.140)
5.59 (1.997) 7.73 (2.029)
4.37 (1.432)
0.10 (0.027) 0.19 (0.080)
0.09 (0.039)
0.08 (0.017) 0.09 (0.027)
0.07 (0.033)
0.02 (0.011) 0.03 (0.012)
0.02 (0.010)
0.03 (0.027) 0.05 (0.022)
0.02 (0.011)
Female (N = 9) Male (N = 8) Female (N = 9)
13.5 (0.34)
13.6 (0.41)
13.7 (0.39)
16.2 (0.97)
16.1 (0.68)
16.2 (1.05)
Female (N = 10) Male (N = 10) Female (N = 10)
34 (14.3)
28 (7.1)
31 (9.9)
135 (44.6)
130 (26.9)
120 (49.3)
65 (15.5)
127 (30.3)
55 (12.9)
2.1 (0.21) (N = 3) 2.2 (−) (N = 1) 2.2 (0.29) (N = 4)
2.0 (0.453) 1.76 (0.288)
1.75 (0.313)
0.38 (0.108) 0.57 (0.203)
0.34 (0.088)
8.1 (2.19)
8.4 (2.41)
9.1 (1.37)
64 (3.5)
45 (2.5)
19 (1.5)
2.4 (0.17)
5.8 (1.01)
28 (5.5)
2.63 (0.093) 2.60 (0.077)
2.10 (0.224) 2.54 (0.269)
145 (2.1)
147 (1.4)
5.0 (0.47)
5.3 (0.60)
105 (1.6)
104 (1.7)
5 (2.4)
10 (3.8)
5.6 (0.90)
61 (2.0)
39 (1.7)
22 (2.4)
1.8 (0.24)
26 (2.0)
2.68 (0.075)
2.06 (0.213)
5.1 (0.40)
4.8 (0.26)
2.7 (0.53)
65 (4.5)
48 (5.0)
18 (2.0)
29 (3.0)
146 (1.4)
105 (1.3)
9 (6.7)
Reno et al. BMC Pharmacology and Toxicology  (2015) 16:29 Page 9 of 16
stability of glucagon throughout the 28 days at room
temperature was confirmed. There was no glucagon
present in any control article device on Day 1 or Day 28.
Efficiency of devices
Achieved powder concentrations of the devices are 
presented in Table 4.
During the initial part of the study, the amounts of
powder released from the devices appeared to be 
inconsistent, with several devices appearing to deliver less
than expected and some devices apparently weighing
more after discharge than before discharge. Following an
investigation, these irregular values for test article discharge
weights (i.e., delivery efficiency) were shown to be caused
by an electrostatic charge on some of the devices that 
interfered with the device weight values obtained pre-dosing.
The charge was removed by simply wiping each device with
a small amount of alcohol. The actual amount given to the
animals before the problem was discovered cannot be 
calculated accurately. However, since only a minimal amount
of powder was present in devices that were opened after
discharge, the animals were most likely given the correct
dose; therefore, the impact on the study was assumed to be
minimal. Also, as seen in Table 4, the placebo group was
more affected by the electrostatic charge than the treated
groups. As outlined in Table 4, the reported efficiency of
the devices was between 82.5 and 94.5 % without wiping
and between 92.8 and 99.5 % with wiping. However, 
efficiency values prior to implementation of corrective actions
cannot be completely accurate since we cannot determine
the exact amount discharged from the devices.
Mortality
There were no drug-related deaths in the study.
Clinical signs
With the exception of transient salivation and some
sneezing in most dogs immediately after IN dosing with
placebo powder or GNP, there were no 
treatment-related adverse clinical signs observed in this study.
All clinical signs noted were considered incidental
and not related to the administration of GNP since
they were sporadic, infrequent, and/or present in 
control animals at a similar frequency and/or incidence.
Body weight
There were no body weight changes related to treatment
with GNP. All body weight changes were considered 
incidental and not related to the administration of GNP.
Food consumption
Food consumption
was
findings
were noted on the
aCalculated using all values from the entire study including discharge weights
obtained before implementation of a device wiping procedure to correct the
adverse effect of device-related electrostatic charge on the analytical balance
bCalculated using values beginning April 8, 2011 (equivalent to study Day 10,
11, or 12 depending on the dog) after instituting a device wiping procedure
to remove electrostatic charge and thus resulting in accurate and expected
discharge weights
GNP.
Ophthalmoscopy
No treatment-related findings were noted during the
course of this study and the observations recorded
were incidental in origin and to be expected in this
type of animal.
Electrocardiography
No treatment-related
electrocardiograms.
Toxicokinetics
Mean uncorrected glucagon concentration-time profiles
of GNP on Day 1 are presented in Fig. 4. Glucagon
concentration levels were below the LLOQ, 200 pg/mL,
in all samples collected in the placebo-powder and
saline-control groups on Day 1. Endogenous glucagon
levels were observed in 11 of 12 dogs from GNP groups
(animals 3502B and 3603B had reported values < LLOQ
while animal 4001B had undetectable glucagon levels).
Following a single GNP IN dose, mean glucagon 
concentration levels increased quickly in dog serum to reach
peak levels within 10 min and declined over the 
sampling interval. Mean peak glucagon levels were similar
across GNP dose levels.
Mean uncorrected glucagon concentration-time profiles
of GNP on Day 28 are presented in Fig. 5. On Day 28, all
samples collected from placebo-control powder and
saline-control animals displayed glucagon levels < LLOQ
with the exception of four samples, one from the 
saline-control group at pre-dose (animal 2503, 211 pg/mL) and
three from the placebo-control powder group at pre-dose
and 20 min post-dosing (animal 1501, 229 pg/mL,
animal 1502, 355 pg/mL, and animal 1503, 201 pg/mL, 
respectively). On Day 28, following daily dosing for 28 
consecutive days, pre-dose samples collected from low- and
high-dose GNP groups generally displayed measurable
glucagon levels.
unaffected by treatment with
Reno et al. BMC Pharmacology and Toxicology  (2015) 16:29 Page 10 of 16
Reno et al. BMC Pharmacology and Toxicology  (2015) 16:29 Page 11 of 16
To comply with standard methodologies for 
endogenous compounds, a baseline correction was also applied
to correct for endogenous glucagon levels and TK
parameters were derived from corrected plasma 
concentration profiles. Baseline was defined as pre-dose values
observed on Day 1. With baseline correction, after a
single test-article administration on Day 1, the mean 
systemic exposures (AUC0-t) to glucagon were 213,385 and
148,561 pg.min/mL for the low- and high-dose groups,
respectively. Median peak glucagon concentration was
observed 10 min after dosing and increased with dose
(6984 vs. 7251 pg/mL, for low- and high-dose groups,
respectively). Following the last dose on Day 28, mean
AUC0-t (267,261 vs. 343,597 pg.min/mL for low- and
high-dose groups, respectively) and Cmax values (8684
vs. 13,171 pg/mL, for low- and high-dose groups,
respectively) increased with dose (Table 5).
Although baseline glucagon levels were different
between treatment groups, baseline levels were very
low in both groups compared with glucagon levels
observed post-dosing. These data suggest that animals
treated with the experimental IN glucagon 
formulation experienced glucagon exposures well in excess of
physiological levels. Consistent with the short half-life
of glucagon in serum, minimal accumulation was
observed following multiple GNP IN administrations
and there were no statistical differences between
sexes.
Hematology, coagulation, clinical chemistry, and urinalysis
There were no adverse test-article related changes in
hematology, coagulation, clinical chemistry, and 
urinalysis parameters. No effect was seen on blood glucose as
samples were taken prior to dosing with glucagon.
Any increases or decreases observed were all within
the reference range for that species and all differences
from the control values, with/without statistical 
significance, were independent of dose and were minor in
magnitude. Thus, they were considered to have no 
biological significance.
Organ weights
There were no prominent organ weight changes related
to GNP-dosed animals and all differences from the 
control group weights were considered incidental and of no
biological significance. A number of means differed from
the control values, without statistical significance, but
considering the inter-animal variability, they were
regarded as incidental or of no biological significance.
Macroscopic findings
There were findings of a dark area and/or pale 
discoloration in the right middle lung lobe of one main animal in
Group 2 and one main animal in Group 4, which was 
considered to be background or procedure-related following
the microscopic evaluation. All other macroscopic 
findings were considered to be incidental or spontaneous 
because they were of low incidence or occurred in control
and/or treated groups.
Microscopic findings
Minimal to moderate atrophy/degeneration of the 
olfactory epithelium (with/without sub-acute inflammation)
was observed in level 4 of the nasal cavity of 2/6 (1/3
males and 1/3 females) Group 1 (placebo-control powder),
0/6 Group 2 (saline control), all Group 3 (low dose), and
all Group 4 (high dose) animals. Since this finding was 
observed in Group 1, Group 3, and Group 4 animals, but
not in Group 2, it was considered treatment-related. There
was also an increase in the incidence and/or severity in
the test-article treated animals in comparison to the
Group 1 animals. Minimal atrophy/degeneration of the 
olfactory epithelium was also present in level 3 of the nasal
cavity of one Group 4 male (4002B). Atrophy/degener-
ation of the olfactory epithelium was not observed in 
recovery animals, which suggests reversibility of the finding.
Minimal to moderate sub-acute bronchioloalveolar
inflammation was observed in the lungs of 3/6 (2/3 males
and 1/3 females) Group 1, 4/6 (3/3 males and 1/3 females)
Group 2, all Group 3, and 4/6 (2/3 males and 2/3 females)
Group
4 animals. This finding was observed in both
Reno et al. BMC Pharmacology and Toxicology  (2015) 16:29 Page 12 of 16
control and treated animals and the mean severity grade
did not vary in relationship to dose level of the test article,
GNP. The sub-acute bronchioloalveolar inflammation of
the lungs correlated with the macroscopic finding of dark
and/or pale discoloration in one Group 2 and one Group
4 animal and was considered to be background or
procedure-related.
Minimal to mild focal hyperplasia or squamous 
metaplasia of the respiratory epithelium was observed in the
carina of 3/6 (2/3 males and 1/3 females) Group 1, 3/6 (2/
3 males and 1/3 females) Group 2, 2/6 (0/3 males and 2/3
females) Group 3, and 4/6 (2/3 males and 2/3 females)
Group 4 animals. Focal hyperplasia or squamous 
metaplasia of the respiratory epithelium was also present in one
Group 1 animal and one Group 4 animal after the 14-day
recovery period. This finding was observed in both the
control and treated groups with an increase in incidence
in Group 4 animals, but with no significant difference
in the severity between groups. Hyperplasia and 
squamous metaplasia of the respiratory epithelium were
regarded as adaptive responses following local 
irritation on the surface of the carinal epithelium and are
not uncommon with inhalation of inert and/or non-toxic
compounds.
All other microscopic findings were considered to be
incidental, spontaneous, background, or 
procedure-related because they were of low incidence or occurred
in control and/or treated groups.
Single-dose intra-tracheal insufflation toxicity in rats
Dose administration
The individual amounts of GNP delivered to Group 2
animals are presented in Table 6. Following dosing
accountability verification, the devices used for animals
2003B, 2005B, 2503B, and 2508D were determined to
have had low efficiencies. The efficiencies were 46, 24,
58, and 58 %, respectively. Therefore, it was decided to
replace these four animals with spare animals and dose
them with new devices. The data from these four
replacement animals (2103B, 2105B, 2603B, and 2608D)
are included in Table 6.
Mortality
There were no deaths over the course of the study.
Clinical signs
There were no adverse clinical signs related to treatment
with GNP. All clinical signs noted were considered 
incidental and not related to the administration of GNP.
Body weight
There were no body weight changes related to treatment
with GNP.
There were no changes in food consumption that were
considered related to treatment with GNP. All variations
were considered of normal biological variation.
Organ weights
There were no changes in organ weights that were clearly
related to treatment with GNP. Changes observed were
sporadic and considered incidental and of normal variation.
Macroscopic findings
A dark area was observed in the lungs of 5/10 (4/5 males
and 1/5 females) air-control (Group 1) rats and 2/10 (1/5
males and 1/5 females) GNP-treated (Group 2) rats at 
termination of the main study phase. The findings in the lungs
and all other macroscopic findings were considered to be
incidental, background, or procedure-related. These changes
were not observed at termination of the recovery period.
Microscopic findings
Minimal alveolar histiocytosis and minimal alveolar
hemorrhage were observed in the lungs of both 
air-control (Group 1) and GNP-treated (Group 2) rats. The
alveolar histiocytosis was considered a normal 
nonspecific pulmonary adaptive response associated with
phagocytosis and clearance of inhaled particulates. These
changes are commonly observed in inhalation studies,
including from air-control animals, and could be related to
inhalation of airborne particulates. The alveolar hemorrhage
Reno et al. BMC Pharmacology and Toxicology  (2015) 16:29 Page 13 of 16
often correlated with the macroscopic finding of dark area
and was considered to be procedure-related or background.
The histiocytosis and alveolar hemorrhage were also present
at the end of the 14-day recovery period. All other
microscopic findings were considered to be incidental
or spontaneous.
Single-dose ocular tolerance in rabbits
Mortality
Three male rabbits (1001, 1102, and 1003) were treated
with GNP. None of the test animals died during the
course of this study.
Clinical signs
Clinical observations noted in the GNP-treated eye
(left eye) and/or surrounding areas included one or more
of the following: clear discharge, red conjunctiva, partial
closure of the eye, and firm swelling of the periorbital area.
These observations correlated with erythema and
edema noted during ocular observations and grading,
and were associated with possible mechanical irritation
due to eyelid movements in presence of a solid powder in
the eyes. All other clinical signs were considered 
incidental and are common in laboratory-housed 
members of this species.
Body weight
There was no body weight change related to the dosing
administration of GNP. Body weights were measured for
general health assessment, and showed expected 
progressive increases during the study period.
Ocular observations and grading
All animals presented slight unilateral (left eye) ocular
findings related to the administration of GNP. In all cases,
the findings noted at all time points (1, 24, 48, and 72 h)
post-dosing, were limited to erythema (redness) and
edema (swelling) of the conjunctiva and the palpebral
membrane. These lesions were attributed to possible
mechanical irritation due to eyelid movements in presence
of solid powder in the eye since GNP was delivered to the
eye as dry powder.
One animal (1001) presented a minimal area of 
fluorescein staining at 24 h post-treatment and none at the
other time points. Ocular grading sheets only indicated
a score of ‘1’ for the area of cornea involved with an
opacity score of ‘0’. The score value of ‘1’ was intended
for the area of ‘fluorescein staining’ following the 
observation after the fluorescein solution instillation for this
animal. This was considered related to a trauma to the
cornea during experimental procedures rather than a
treatment-related effect.
Macroscopic findings
No GNP-related macroscopic changes were observed at
necropsy. Animal 1102 presented a single, bilateral dark
red area at the nictitating membrane of the eyes. This
change was considered to be incidental and of no 
toxicological significance.

>>>section: introduction
Reno et al. BMC Pharmacology and Toxicology  (2015) 16:29
DOI 10.1186/s40360-015-0026-9
RESEARCH ARTICLE
A novel nasal powder formulation of
glucagon: toxicology studies in animal
models
Frederick E. Reno1, Patrick Normand2, Kevin McInally2, Sherwin Silo3, Patricia Stotland4, Myriam Triest4,
Dolores Carballo4 and Claude Piché4*

>>>section: table_1
Table 1 Pivotal toxicology studies conducted with the GNP 
drug product 
Study type 
Species/N/Gender 
Test articles and dosage 
28-day sub-chronic Rat/71M/71F 
Saline, placebo liquid, GNP 
toxicology 
ingredients in solution at 0.1 
and 0.2 mg/rat/day for 28 days 
28-day sub-chronic Dog/16M/16F 
Saline, placebo powder, 
toxicology 
GNP at 2 and 4 mg/dog/day 
for 28 days 
Acute toxicology 
Rat/16M/16F 
Air placebo control, GNP 
at 0.5 mg intra-tracheally 
Acute toxicology 
Rabbit 
30-mg drug product 
administered directly in eye 
M male, F female 

>>>section: table_2
Table 2 Summary toxicokinetic parameters of glucagon in rats (gender combined) 
Day 
Group 
Dose level of 
Mean (± SE) 
glucagon (mg/day) 
AUC0-t 
AUC0-90 
Cmax 
tmax 
RA 
(pg min/mL) 
(pg min/mL) 
(pg/mL) 
(min) 
1 
Low dose 
0.1 
8095 ± 3266 
8095 ± 3266 
390 ± 240 
10.0 
NC 
High dose 
0.2 
172,893 ± 72,774 
172,893 ± 72,774 
9961 ± 6443 
10.0 
NC 
28 
Low dose 
0.1 
43,036 ± 21,047 
43,036 ± 21,047 
988 ± 851 
60.0 
5.31 
High dose 
0.2 
60,073 ± 20,639 
60,073 ± 20,639 
2109 ± 1464 
20.0 
0.347 
NC not calculated 

>>>section: table_3
Table 3 Summary of hematology, coagulation, clinical chemistry, and urinalysis data in dogs, Day 29 relative to start datea 
Parameter 
Group 1: Placebo control 
Group 2: Saline control 
Group 3: Low dose 
Hematology 
Male (N = 9) 
Female (N = 10) 
Male (N = 10) 
Female (N = 10) 
Male (N = 10) 
Red blood cells (1012/L) 
8.62 (0.433) 
8.08 (0.378) 
8.52 (0.298) 
8.14 (0.236) 
8.59 (0.441) 
Hemoglobin (g/L) 
149 (6.8) 
142 (6.2) 
148 (5.7) 
144 (3.1) 
149 (6.7) 
Hematocrit (L/L) 
0.47 (0.019) 
0.44 (0.015) 
0.47 (0.019) 
0.45 (0.010) 
0.47 (0.023) 
Mean corpuscular volume (fL) 
55.1 (1.69) 
54.5 (1.45) 
55.4 (1.16) 
55.1 (1.05) 
55.0 (1.21) 
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin (pg) 
17.3 (0.35) 
17.6 (0.52) 
17.4 (0.25) 
17.7 (0.41) 
17.3 (0.37) 
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (g/L) 
314 (4.6) 
323 (7.1) 
314 (3.0) 
321 (4.1) 
315 (3.9) 
Platelets (109/L) 
926 (148.3) 
941 (105.1) 
966 (186.9) 
887 (123.7) 
895 (169.0) 
% Reticulocytes (%) 
1.79 (0.652) 
1.66 (0.517) 
1.95 (0.477) 
1.57 (0.381) 
2.01 (0.377) 
Reticulocytes (1012/L) 
0.152 (0.0491) 
0.133 (0.0379) 
0.165 (0.0364) 
0.128 (0.0318) 
0.171 (0.0219) 
White blood cells (109/L) 
8.44 (1.498) 
5.56 (1.867) 
9.08 (1.476) 
6.92 (1.547) 
9.41 (2.417) 
Neutrophils (109/L) 
0.74 (0.188) 
0.40 (0.165) 
0.82 (0.299) 
0.39 (0.109) 
0.85 (0.263) 
Lymphocytes (109/L) 
7.40 (1.349) 
4.94 (1.803) 
7.89 (1.294) 
6.21 (1.362) 
8.20 (2.338) 
Monocytes (109/L) 
0.13 (0.049) 
0.11 (0.060) 
0.19 (0.044) 
0.16 (0.070) 
0.18 (0.058) 
Eosinophils (109/L) 
0.10 (0.026) 
0.07 (0.023) 
0.11 (0.040) 
0.09 (0.034) 
0.10 (0.033) 
Basophils (109/L) 
0.03 (0.010) 
0.02 (0.007) 
0.03 (0.010) 
0.02 (0.007) 
0.03 (0.019) 
Leucocytes (109/L) 
0.04 (0.012) 
0.03 (0.015) 
0.04 (0.017) 
0.05 (0.039) 
0.05 (0.033) 
Coagulation 
Male (N = 9) 
Female (N = 10) 
Male (N = 10) 
Female (N = 10) 
Male (N = 10) 
Prothrombin time (Sec) 
13.5 (0.53) 
13.3 (0.54) 
13.4 (0.35) 
13.7 (0.53) 
13.3 (0.34) 
Activated partial thromboplastin time (Sec) 
17.1 (1.28) 
15.5 (2.78) (N = 9) 
16.5 (1.03) 
16.6 (1.25) 
16.8 (1.68) 
Clinical chemistry 
Male (N = 9) 
Female (N = 10) 
Male (N = 10) 
Female (N = 10) 
Male (N = 10) 
Alanine transaminase (U/L) 
27 (4.5) 
29 (8.7) 
30 (5.4) 
30 (7.4) 
31 (8.7) 
Aspartate aminotransferase (U/L) 
138 (35.4) 
114 (18.1) 
124 (30.3) 
120 (25.5) 
148 (24.0) 
Alkaline phosphatase (U/L) 
140 (25.9) 
70 (17.9) 
139 (19.9) 
70 (12.2) 
135 (28.3) 
Total bilirubin (μmolL) 
2.1 (0.58) (N = 3) 
1.9 (0.14) (N = 2) 
2.0 (0.21) (N = 2) 
1.9 (0.00) (N = 2) 
1.9 (−) (N = 1) 
Cholesterol (mmol/L) 
1.80 (0.561) 
1.85 (0.432) 
1.67 (0.311) 
1.84 (0.354) 
1.49 (0.416) 
Triglycerides (mmol/L) 
0.57 (0.252) 
0.28 (0.050) 
0.57 (0.136) 
0.36 (0.113) 
0.55 (0.229) 
Glucose (mmol/L) 
7.5 (1.06) 
6.9 (1.75) 
7.1 (0.85) 
8.5 (1.85) 
7.4 (0.92) 

>>>section: table_4
Table 3 Summary of hematology, coagulation, clinical chemistry, and urinalysis data in dogs, Day 29 relative to start datea (Continued) 
Total protein (g/L) 
59 (4.0) 
61 (5.8) 
59 (2.2) 
62 (2.9) 
59 (3.2) 
Albumin (g/L) 
39 (2.3) 
44 (4.1) 
39 (0.9) 
43 (1.8) 
38 (2.6) 
Globulin (g/L) 
20 (2.4) 
17 (2.4) 
21 (1.5) 
19 (2.1) 
21 (2.1) 
Albumin/Globulin ratio 
2.0 (0.24) 
2.6 (0.30) 
1.9 (0.12) 
2.3 (0.26) 
1.8 (0.23) 
Urea (mmol/L) 
5.0 (0.78) 
5.4 (0.87) 
4.6 (0.67) 
5.2 (0.69) 
5.1 (0.87) 
Creatinine (μmolL) 
22 (3.3) 
28 (2.5) 
21 (3.0) 
28 (5.1) 
25 (2.9) 
Calcium (mmol/L) 
2.55 (0.116) 
2.52 (0.064) 
2.60 (0.044) 
2.57 (0.069) 
2.59 (0.080) 
Phosphate (mmol/L) 
2.45 (0.162) 
2.07 (0.126) 
2.53 (0.145) 
2.06 (0.249) 
2.54 (0.174) 
Sodium (mmol/L) 
143 (1.1) 
143 (1.7) 
144 (1.5) 
142 (1.8) 
146 (1.0) 
Potassium (mmol/L) 
5.1 (0.20) 
4.7 (0.39) 
5.0 (0.31) 
5.1 (0.35) 
5.2 (0.32) 
Chloride (mmol/L) 
102 (1.9) 
105 (1.9) 
102 (1.6) 
104 (2.3) 
104 (0.9) 
Urinalysis 
Male (N = 9) 
Female (N = 10) 
Male (N = 10) 
Female (N = 10) 
Male (N = 10) Female (N = 10) Male (N = 10) Female (N = 9) 
Volume (mL) 
7 (3.5) 
7 (5.6) 
9 (2.9) 
5 (2.6) 
7 (5.4) 
Specific gravity 
1.030 (0.0090) 
1.028 (0.0138) 
1.024 (0.0077) 
1.027 (0.0083) 
1.027 (0.0112) 1.026 (0.0079) 1.024 (0.0068) 1.021 (0.0156) 
aAll data are presented as mean (standard deviation) 

>>>section: table_5
Table 4 Achieved powder dose levels of GNP per animal 
Group 
Group 
Targeted powder Achieved average % 
number 
designation dose (mg) 
powder dose (mg) efficiency 
1 
Placebo 
40.0 
33.0a 
82.5 
control 
37.1b 
92.8 
3 
Low dose 
20.0 
18.9a 
94.5 
19.9b 
99.5 
4 
High dose 
40.0 
36.8a 
92.0 
39.6b 
99.0 

>>>section: table_6
Table 5 Baseline-corrected toxicokinetic parameters of glucagon in dogs 
Parameters 
Mean (% CV) 
Day 1 
Day 28 
GNP 2 mg/day 
GNP 4 mg/day 
GNP 2 mg/day 
GNP 4 mg/day 
N 
6 
6 
6 
6 
AUC0-90 (pg min/mL) 
229,465 (27.9) 
151,619 (52.1) 
267,261 (41.6) 
345,747 (61.4) 
AUC0-t (pg min/mL) 
213,385 (15.8) 
148,561 (52.7) 
267,261 (41.6) 
343,597 (62.4) 
Cmax (pg/mL) 
6984 (26.0) 
7251 (50.6) 
8684 (34.1) 
13,171 (56.4) 
Tmaxa (min) 
10.0 (10.0, 20.0) 
10.0 (5.00, 20.0) 
10.0 (5.00, 10.0) 
10.0 (5.00, 20.0) 
T1/2 (min) 
NC (NC)b 
11.4 (NC)c 
21.1 (18.4)d 
7.79 (NC)e 
NC not calculated 
aMedian (Min, Max); bn = 0; cn = 2; dn = 4; en = 1 

>>>section: table_7
Table 6 GNP doses administered per animal 
Animal 
Target (mg) 
Actual (mg) 
% of target 
2001B 
0.5 
0.39 
78 
2002B 
0.5 
0.70 
140 
2103B 
0.5 
0.49 
98 
2004B 
0.5 
0.29 
58 
2105B 
0.5 
0.63 
126 
2006D 
0.5 
0.74 
148 
2007D 
0.5 
0.24 
48 
2008D 
0.5 
0.32 
64 
Mean 
0.5 
0.48 
95.0 
2501B 
0.5 
0.55 
110 
2502B 
0.5 
0.56 
112 
2603B 
0.5 
0.61 
122 
2504B 
0.5 
0.60 
120 
2505B 
0.5 
0.47 
94 
2506D 
0.5 
0.50 
100 
2507D 
0.5 
0.64 
128 
2608D 
0.5 
0.14 
28 
Mean 
0.5 
0.51 
101.8 
Mean values are shown in bold 
Food consumption 

>>>section: figure_1
Fig. 1 (a) GNP dosing device and carrying tube (b) GNP dosing 
device at activation 

>>>section: figure_2
Fig. 2 Mean (+ SE) glucagon serum concentration profiles in rats following a single intra-nasal administration-Day 1. Glucagon concentrations 
on Day 1 (linear scale, gender combined). Levels were below the lower limit of quantification (LLOQ, 200 pg/mL) in all samples collected from rats 
in the control groups and low- and high-dose groups prior to dosing on Day 1. Following the first intra-nasal drug administration on Day 1, only 
four of 12 animals in the low-dose GNP group displayed levels of glucagon above the LLOQ. Following a single high-dose GNP intra-nasal administration, 
all animals (12 of 12) displayed levels above LLOQ on at least one occasion, and mean glucagon concentration levels increased quickly in rat serum to 
reach peak levels within 10 min and declined over the sampling interval 

>>>section: figure_3
Fig. 3 Mean (+ SE) glucagon serum concentration profiles in rats following 28 consecutive days of daily intra-nasal administration-Day 28. Glucagon 
concentrations on Day 28 (linear scale, gender combined). All samples collected from placebo-control liquid and saline-control animals displayed 
undetectable levels of glucagon with the exception of two samples at 20 min post-dose, one from the placebo-control liquid group (animal 1016D, 
8644 pg/mL) and one from the saline-control group (animal 2011D, 45 pg/mL). Following 28 days of consecutive daily dosing, all pre-dose samples 
collected from low- and high-dose groups were below (animal 4516H, 20 pg/mL, animal 4519E, 180 pg/mL, and animal 4520E, 22 pg/mL) or close to 
the limit of quantification (animal 3515E, 345 pg/mL). After dosing, nine of 12 animals from the low-dose GNP group displayed levels above LLOQ on 
at least one occasion while all animals (12 of 12) in the high-dose group displayed levels above LLOQ on at least one occasion 

>>>section: figure_4
Fig. 4 Mean (+ SE) uncorrected glucagon serum concentration profiles in dogs following a single intra-nasal administration-Day 1. Glucagon 
concentrations on Day 1 (linear scale). Levels were below the LLOQ (200 pg/mL) in all samples collected in the placebo-powder group on Day 1. 
Following a single GNP intra-nasal dose, mean glucagon concentration levels increased quickly to reach peak levels within 10 min and declined 
over the sampling interval. Mean peak glucagon levels were similar across GNP dose levels 

>>>section: figure_5
Fig. 5 Mean (+ SE) uncorrected glucagon serum concentration profiles in dogs following multiple intra-nasal administrations-Day 28. Glucagon 
concentrations on Day 28 (linear scale). All samples collected from placebo-control powder and saline-control animals displayed glucagon 
levels < LLOQ with the exception of three samples, one from the saline-control group at pre-dose (animal 2503, 211 pg/mL) and three from the 
placebo-control powder group at pre-dose and 20 min post-dosing (animal 1501, 229 pg/mL, animal 1502, 355 pg/mL, and animal 1503, 201 pg/mL, 
respectively). On Day 28, following daily dosing for 28 consecutive days, pre-dose samples collected from low- and high-dose GNP groups generally 
displayed measurable glucagon levels 

**References**
 References
1 Cryer PE Hypoglycaemia the limiting factor in the glycaemic management of Type I and Type II Diabetes Diabetologia 200245937-48
2 Deary IJ Symptoms of hypoglycaemia and effects on mental performance and emotions In Frier BM Fisher M editors Hypoglycaemia in clinical diabetes 2nd ed Chicester West Sussex England John Wiley & Sons Limited 2007 p 25-48
3 Cryer PE Davis SN Shamoon H Hypoglycemia in diabetes Diabetes Care 2003261902-12
4 Leckie AM Graham MK Grant JB Ritchie PJ Frier BM Frequency severity and morbidity of hypoglycemia occurring in the workplace in people with insulin-treated diabetes Diabetes Care 2005281333-8
5 Zammitt NN Frier BM Hypoglycemia in type 2 diabetes pathophysiology frequency and effects of different treatment modalities Diabetes Care 2005282948-61
6 UK Hypoglycemia Study Group Risk of hypoglycaemia in types 1 and 2 diabetes effects of treatment modalities and their duration Diabetologia 2007501140-7
7 Cryer PE The clinical problem of hypoglycemia in diabetes In Hypoglycemia in diabetes pathophysiology prevalence and prevention Alexandria VA American Diabetes Association 2009 p 1-15
8 American Diabetes Association Standards of medical care in diabetes-2015 Diabetes Care 201538 suppl 1S1-94
9 Jain MK Components of biological membranes In Introduction to biological membranes New York John Wiley & Sons 1988 p 10-50
10 GLUCACON (glucagon for injection rDNA origin) Product Monograph Toronto Ontario Eli Lilly Canada Inc 2012 http//wwwlillyca/en/pdf/ product-monograph/04_rglucagon-pm_9july2012pdf Accessed 26 September 2015
11 GLUCAGEN® and GLUCAGEN® Hypokit 1 mg (glucagon) Product Monograph Mississauga Ontario Novo Nordisk Canada Inc 2014 http//wwwpaladin-labscom/our_products/PM_GlucaGen_ENpdf Accessed 26 September 2015
12 Root MA Ellis J Staub A Effect of glucagon on insulin hypoglycemia Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 195485507-11
13 Eistrup C Hjortkjaer RK Pickersgill N Virgo DM Woolley AP Glucagon produced by recombinant DNA technology repeated dose toxicity studies intravenous administration to CD rats and beagle dogs for four weeks Pharmacol Toxicol 199373103-8 Reno et al BMC Pharmacology and Toxicology  (2015) 1629 Page 16 of 16
14 Merkus FW Verhoef JC Marttin E Romeijn SG van der Kuy PH Hermens WA et al Cyclodextrins in nasal drug delivery Adv Drug Deliv Rev 19993641-57
15 Asai K Morishita M Katsuta H Hosoda S Shinomiya K Noro M et al The effects of water-soluble cyclodextrins on the histological integrity of the rat nasal mucosa Int J Pharm 200224625-35 Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central and take full advantage of • Convenient online submission • Thorough peer review • No space constraints or color figure charges • Immediate publication on acceptance • Inclusion in PubMed CAS Scopus and Google Scholar • Research which is freely available for redistribution Submit your manuscript at wwwbiomedcentralcom/submit
