toxicological sciences 132(1), 177-195 2013
doi:10.1093/toxsci/kfs335
Advance Access publication January 3, 2013
An Animal Model of Marginal Iodine Deficiency During Development:
The Thyroid Axis and Neurodevelopmental Outcome*
Mary  E.  Gilbert,*,1  Joan  M.  Hedge,†  Liza  Valentín-Blasini,‡  Benjamin  C.  Blount,‡  Kurunthachalam  Kannan,§  Joseph  Tietge,¶
R. Thomas Zoeller,|| Kevin M. Crofton,† Jeffrey M. Jarrett,‡ and Jeffrey W. Fisher|||
*Toxicity  Assessment  Division  and  †Integrated  Systems  Biology  Division,  U.S.  Environmental  Protection  Agency,  Research  Triangle  Park,  North  Carolina;
‡Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention,  Atlanta,  Georgia;  §Wadsworth  Center,  New  York  State  Department  of  Health,  and  Department  of  Environmental
Health  Sciences,  School  of  Public  Health,  State  University  of  New  York  at  Albany,  Albany,  New  York;  ¶MidAtlantic  Ecology  Division,  U.S.  Environmental
Protection  Agency,  Duluth,  Minnesota;  ||Department  of  Biology,  University  of  Massachusetts,  Amherst,  Massachusetts;  and  |||National  Center  for  Toxicological
Research, Food and Drug Administration, Jefferson, Arkansas
*This  document  has  been  subjected  to  review  by  the  FDA  National  Center  for  Toxicological  Research,  the  EPA  National  Health  and  Environmental  Effects
Research  Laboratory,  and  the  National  Center  for  Environmental  Assessment  and  is  approved  for  publication.  Approval  does  not  signify  that  the  contents  reflect
the  views  of  the  agencies,  nor  does  mention  of  trade  names  or  commercial  products  constitute  endorsement  or  recommendation  for  use.
1To  whom  correspondence  should  be  addressed  at  Toxicity  Assessment  Division  (MD-B105-05),  National  Health  and  Environmental  Effects  Research
Laboratory,  109  TW  Alexander  Drive,  U.S.  Environmental  Protection  Agency,  Research  Triangle  Park,  NC  27711.  Fax:  (919)  541-4849.
E-mail: gilbert.mary@epa.gov.
Received August 31, 2012; accepted December 5, 2012
January
3
2013
Thyroid hormones (THs) are essential for brain development,
and iodine is required for TH synthesis. Environmental chemicals
that perturb the thyroid axis result in modest reductions in TH, yet
there is a paucity of data on the extent of neurological impairments
associated with low-level TH disruption. This study examined the
dose-response characteristics of marginal iodine deficiency (ID) on
parameters of thyroid function and neurodevelopment. Diets 
deficient in iodine were prepared by adding 975, 200, 125, 25, or 0 µg/
kg potassium iodate to the base casein diet to produce five 
nominal iodine levels ranging from ample (Diet 1: 1000 μg iodine/kg
chow, D1) to deficient (Diet 5: 25 µg iodine/kg chow, D5). Female
Long Evans rats were maintained on these diets beginning 7 weeks
prior to breeding until the end of lactation. Dams were sacrificed
on gestational days 16 and 20, or when pups were weaned on 
postnatal day (PN) 21. Fetal tissue was harvested from the dams, and
pups were sacrificed on PN14 and PN21. Blood, thyroid gland, and
brain were collected for analysis of iodine, TH, and TH precursors
and metabolites. Serum and thyroid gland iodine and TH were
reduced in animals receiving two diets that were most deficient in
iodine. T4 was reduced in the fetal brain but was not altered in the
neonatal brain. Neurobehavior, assessed by acoustic startle, water
maze learning, and fear conditioning, was unchanged in adult
offspring, but excitatory synaptic transmission was impaired in
the dentate gyrus in animals receiving two diets that were most
deficient in iodine. A  15% reduction in cortical T4 in the fetal
brain was sufficient to induce permanent reductions in synaptic
function in adults. These findings have implications for regulation
of TH-disrupting chemicals and suggest that standard 
behavioral assays do not readily detect neurotoxicity induced by modest
developmental TH disruption.
Published by Oxford University Press 2013.
Key Words: thyroid; iodine; hypothyroidism; hippocampus;
neurodevelopment; learning; synaptic function; biologically based
dose-response models; BBDR.
Thyroid hormone (TH) is essential for normal brain 
development (Williams, 2008), so it is important to ensure that aspects
of the human environment support adequate thyroid function. An
important element of the human environment is nutritional 
status, and having adequate supplies of dietary iodine is key to 
thyroid health. Severe, chronic iodine deficiency (ID) during fetal
and early neonatal development leads to hypothyroidism and
mental retardation in children (DeLange, 1994; Zimmermann,
2007). A recent report indicated that in 2011 nearly one third of
the global population had inadequate iodine intakes (Andersson
et al., 2012). Marginal ID is also associated with lower measures
of cognitive function on a population level (Aghini Lombardi
et  al., 1995, Laurberg, 2009) and has been found in more
than 15% of women of child-bearing age in the United States
(Hollowell and Haddow, 2007; Perrine et  al., 2010). This is
alarming given that adequate iodine intake is crucial during 
gestation, when the mother is the only source of iodine for the fetus.
A number of thyroid-active environmental contaminants
have been identified that interfere with the neuroendocrine
system that controls the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid (HPT)
axis (Brucker-Davis, 1998). It is highly likely that the impact of
exposures to thyroid-disrupting chemicals is exacerbated under
conditions of marginal ID (Kunisue et al., 2010, 2011; Thilly
et al., 1993; van Wijk et al., 2008). As such, there is a need to
178 GILBERT ET AL.
develop tools to aid in assessment of health risks associated
with thyroid-active chemicals for sensitive subpopulations,
particularly women with preexisting thyroid disease, women
with iodine insufficiencies, and pregnant women and their
progeny (Blount and Valentin-Blasini, 2006; Knudsen et  al.,
2002; Parham et  al., 2012; Wise et  al., 2012). Biologically
based dose-response (BBDR) models are one such tool that can
be implemented to reduce uncertainties in assessment of risks
when extrapolating data from rodents to humans. Mathematical
models that describe the impact of environmental stressors on
some aspects of thyroid function in the adult (McLanahan et al.,
2008; Merrill et al., 2003) and developing rats exist (Clewell
et al., 2003), but these were not designed to be predictive of
overt or neurodevelopmental effects of stressors. To exploit
the potential of computational models fully and improve the
reliability of their predictions, a more complete appreciation
of the quantitative relationships along the entire continuum
is needed-from environmental exposure to early upstream
biological perturbations and subsequent downstream overt
effects (Parham et al., 2012; Wise et al., 2012).
Specifically for models of developmental TH insufficiency,
there exists considerable uncertainty in three main areas: (1)
changes in the dynamics of thyroid economy during the 
different life stages, (2) dose-response relationships that extend to
modest degrees of perturbation, and (3) determining the 
linkage between modest degrees of HPT axis perturbation and
downstream neurological consequences. The current study was
conducted to address some of these uncertainties. We report the
effects of ID on different HPT axis parameters in pregnant rats,
fetuses, and neonates. We also report the effects of relatively
modest degrees of TH insufficiency on a number of neurological
endpoints in the adult offspring. In a companion article, a 
quantitative BBDR model is described for neonatal rats, 
incorporating the critical biological parameters in the dam and neonate
garnered from results of the present study (Fisher et al., 2012).
MATERIALS AND METHoDS
Animals
A total of 207 young adult female Long Evans rats, aged 40 to 60 days,
were obtained from Charles River Breeding Laboratory (Raleigh, NC). In our
Notes.  Potassium  iodate  was  added  to  the  base  chow  formulation  in  varying  quantities.  Measured  iodide  (I)  was  assessed  by  IC-MS-MS  as  iodate  as  previously
reported (Gilbert et al., 2011).
facility, animals were paired housed in polycarbonate cages on pine shaving
bedding and permitted free access to food (Purina 5001 chow) and water.
Animals were housed in a facility certified by Association for Assessment and
Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care, and experiments were conducted
using the protocol approved by Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.
Temperature was maintained at 22ºC, with relative humidity of 40-60% and a
12-h light:dark (7:00 a.m.:7:00 p.m.) photoperiod.
Iodide-deficient diets. After 2-4 weeks, animals were assigned to diet
groups, counterbalanced for weight, and provided diets containing one of five
iodine concentrations (Research Diets, Newark, NJ). The stock casein diet was
based on nutritional standards for laboratory animal diets established by the
American Institution of Nutrition (1977). With the exception of iodine content,
this diet was nutritionally replete, and animals did not differ in body weight
gain from similarly aged female rats of this strain maintained on Purina 5001
chow, as described by Gilbert et  al. (2011). The iodine content of the five
casein-based diets was varied by adjusting the quantity of potassium iodate
added to the base AIN-76A stock diet, nominally ranging from ample (Base I +
0.975 µg/gm, D1) to deficient (Base I = 0.025 µg/gm, D5), as summarized in
Table 1. D2 contains the recommended iodine for AIN-76A diet; D5 represents
the stock AIN diet with no iodine added. D2 and D3 meet previously 
established minimal requirements sufficient to meet physiological requirements
(3-5 µg I/day; Heninger and Albright, 1975). D1 is far in excess of them but
comparable to standard Purina 5001 and 5008 rat chow routinely used in our
facility for nonpregnant and pregnant rats (Table 1). Food consumption was
monitored by weighing feed bins thrice weekly and calculating mean daily
consumption per rat throughout the prebreeding, gestational, and lactational
periods (Table 1). Body weights were measured weekly prior to breeding and
daily during pregnancy. After parturition, pup and dam body weights were
determined on postnatal day (PN) 4, PN14, and PN21.
Breeding. Animals were fed specialized diets for a minimum of 6.5 weeks
prior to breeding. Vaginal smears were monitored for 3 weeks prior to breeding
and receptive females placed with males overnight on the evening of 
proes-trus. The following morning, successful copulation was evaluated by 
examining females for the presence of a vaginal plug and sperm in the vaginal fluid.
If present, this was designated as gestational day (GD) 0. Thereafter, animals
were single housed, and body weight was monitored daily.
Gestational study. One group of dams from the control (D1) and the two
lowest iodine (D4 and D5) diets were sacrificed on GD16 or GD20. All 
animals were sacrificed by decapitation between 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m., and to
avoid a temporal bias in sample collection, each diet group was sampled 
consecutively until all animals were sacrificed. Dam and fetal trunk blood, thyroid
gland, placenta, and amniotic fluid were collected from dams at sacrifice. Trunk
blood from fetuses was pooled across each litter sacrificed on GD20 and placed
on ice to clot before serum separation, as described below. It was not possible
to collect sufficient volumes of blood for hormone analysis from the fetuses on
GD16. The brains were removed from three to four fetuses per litter at each
gestational time point and forebrains dissected. All tissues were flash frozen in
liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C until analysis.
MARGINAL IODINE DEFICIENCY, THYROID, HIPPOCAMPUS 179
Postnatal study. Dams and their litters were maintained on the special
iodine diets until pups were weaned on PN21. Litters were culled to a maximum
of 10 pups per litter on PN4, balancing an equal number of males and females
as much as possible. Trunk blood was collected from one male and one female
pup per litter on PN14 and PN21. Dams were sacrificed on PN21, and trunk
blood was collected. Thyroid glands were removed from dams and pups at
sacrifice, weighed, and stored at −80°C for determination of iodide content
and THs. Brains of PN14 and PN21 pups were removed; cortex, cerebellum,
and hippocampus were dissected and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen
and stored at −80°C until analysis. All animals were sacrificed between 8:00
a.m. and 12:00  p.m., and time of sacrifice was counterbalanced across diet
groups. At weaning, offspring were paired housed with same-sex litter mates
and switched to Purina 5001 chow until behavioral and electrophysiological
assessments were conducted. A  summary and timeline of exposure and
assessments performed are presented in Figure 1.
Chow and Serum Measures
Iodine was measured in each lot of chow prepared for these studies to verify
the iodine content; these data were reported previously (Gilbert et al., 2011).
Serum perchlorate, thiocyanate, nitrate, and iodide were analyzed using 
previously published methods, with slight modifications (Valentin-Blasini et al.,
2007). Additional information on the aforementioned method and other 
analytical measures for serum and thyroid gland is available in Supplementary
Materials.
Thyroid Gland Measures
Iodine from thyroid gland digests from postnatal dams and pups was 
analyzed using a previously published method for quantifying iodine in urine, with
modification (Caldwell et al., 2003), using inductively coupled plasma dynamic
reaction cell mass spectrometry (ICP-DRC-MS). This methodology quantifies
all forms of iodide, iodine, and iodate as they are all converted into one form
for analysis of total iodine. All molecular species are destroyed and all iodine
converted to the I+ ion prior to quantification. Hormones and metabolites were
measured in these samples according to procedures described by Kunisue et al.
(2010, 2011), using liquid chromotography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-
MS/MS) and an API 2000 electrospray triple quadrupole mass spectrometer.
An high-performance liquid chromatography/inductively coupled plasma-mass
spectrometry (HPLC/ICP-MS) method was used to measure TH 
precursors (iodine, monoiodotyrosine [MIT], and diiodotyrosine [DIT]), hormones
(3,5,3′-triiodothyronine, T3, and thyroxine, T4), and metabolites (3,3′-diiodo-
thyronine, T2, and 3,3′,5′-triiodothyronine, rT3) in the thyroid glands collected
from pregnant dams on GD16 and GD20 according to previously published
procedures (Tietge et al., 2010).
Serum TH Analysis
Dams and pups. All blood samples were placed on ice to clot for 30 min,
centrifuged to separate serum, and stored at −80°C until analysis. Serum
concentrations of total T4 and T3 were measured in duplicate using standard
solid-phase Coat-A-Count radioimmunoassay (RIA) kits (Siemens Medical
Solutions Diagnostics, Los Angeles, CA). Assay variation was assessed using
the multivalent control module (Siemens Medical Solutions) to measure low,
medium, and high total T4 values before and after the experimental samples
were analyzed by radioimmunoassay (Diagnostic Products Corp., Los Angeles,
CA). The lowest calibrator was 5 ng/ml for the T4 and 10 ng/ml for the T3
assays. The intra-assay coefficient of variations (CV) were 5.6 and 3.5% for
T4 and T3, respectively, and interassay CVs were 5.8 and 5.1% for T4 and
T3, respectively. Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) was measured using a
standard double-antibody assay as described by Thibodeaux et al. (2003). All
samples were run in duplicate, and the intra-assay CV was 8.0%. Interassay
variations ranged from 1 to 10%. The limits of detection for each assay,
described as 90% assay binding, were 0.41 µg/dl for T4, 14.3 ng/dl for T3, and
0.39 ng/ml for TSH. With the exception of fetal serum (see below), all samples
evaluated in this study were well above these detectable limits.
Fetal serum T4 analysis. It was not possible to obtain sufficient volumes
for serum TH assessments in GD16 fetuses. Blood from GD20 fetuses was
pooled across the litter, and total T4 was measured in 5 µl volumes as previously
described (Bansal et al., 2005). Briefly, each assay tube contained 100 µl barbital
buffer (0.11M sodium barbital, 0.1% [wt/vol] 8-anilino-1-napthalen-sulfonic
acid sodium salt, 15% [wt/vol] bovine globulin, Cohn fraction II, 0.1% [wt/vol]
gelatin [pH 8.6]), 100 µl anti-T4 (rabbit; Sigma) diluted to a final concentration
of 1:30,000, and 100 µl 125I− labeled T4 (12,000-15,000 cpm; PerkinElmer/
NEN Life Science Products, Waltham, MA). Standards were prepared from
T4 (Sigma) measured using a Cahn electrobalance and were run in triplicate,
whereas samples were run in duplicate. Standards were calibrated to measure
180 GILBERT ET AL.
serum T4 levels from 0.4 to 25.6  µg/dl. Tubes were incubated at 37°C for
30 min and then chilled on wet ice for 30 min. Radioactivity was precipitated by
adding 300 µl ice-cold polyethylene glycol 8000 (20% [wt/vol]; Sigma). Tubes
were centrifuged at 1800 × g for 20 min at 4°C, the supernatant was aspirated,
and the pellets were counted in a γ-counter (Cobra II; PerkinElmer). The assay
was run at 40-50% binding; nonspecific binding was generally less than 8%.
Brain Hormone Analysis
Cortex samples from fetal brains on GD16 and GD20 and from PN14 pups
from each litter were assessed for tissue concentration of T4 using 
radioimmunoassay according to procedures previously described (Bansal et al., 2005).
Briefly, tissue samples (~50 mg) were homogenized in cold methanol 
containing 25µM 2-idodopropanoic acid and 1.17mM propylthioruracil (PTU). The
homogenate was spiked with 125I-T4 and centrifuged. The resulting supernatant
was transferred to a fresh 1.5-ml tube and evaporated to dryness using a speed
vacuum. A volume of 500 µl of cell lysis buffer (5mM PIPES, 85mM KCl,
0.5% NP40, 1× protease inhibitor cocktail) was added to the cell pellet for total
protein analysis (BCA Protein Assay kit, Pierce). Dried tissue extracts were
resuspended in 50 µl cold methanol and extracted with 200 µl chloroform and
50 µl barbital buffer as described above. The aqueous phase was removed, dried
in a speed vacuum, counted for extraction efficiency calculations, and stored
for T4 analysis as described above.
Behavioral Tests of Altered Neurodevelopment
A series of behavioral tests were performed to evaluate developmental 
neurotoxicity in adult male and female offspring. No treatment-related effects were
observed in acoustic startle response, Morris water maze performance, or trace
fear conditioning; these methods and results (Figs. 5-7) are summarized in
Supplementary Material.
Synaptic Transmission in Dentate Gyrus
Surgery. Adult male offspring (4-6 months of age) selected from litters
(1-2/litter) from each of three diet groups (D2, D4, and D5) were anesthetized
with urethane (1.5-2 gm/kg, ip) and prepared for surgical implantation of 
electrodes as previously described (Gilbert, 2011). Two animals were assessed each
day, and dose groups were counterbalanced over days to equate the mean age
across groups. Data represent 11 D2, 13 D4, and 21 D5 animals sampled from
8, 9, and 12 litters, respectively.
Animals were mounted in a stereotaxic frame, and bipolar twisted stainless
steel wire electrodes (250 μm in diameter, insulated except for the cut tips, and
crimped onto gold-plated Amphenol pins) were lowered into the angular 
bundle of the perforant path according to flat skull stereotaxic coordinates (7.2 mm
posterior to bregma, 4.1 mm lateral to the midline). A  monopolar tungsten
wire recording electrode was lowered into the ipsilateral dentate gyrus 3.5 mm
posterior to bregma and 2-2.2 mm lateral to the midline. Nominal depths for
stimulating and recording electrodes were 2.2 and 3.5 mm below dura, 
respectively, but optimal depth placement was achieved through electrophysiological
monitoring of the response evoked in the dentate gyrus following single-pulse
perforant path stimulation.
Stimulation of the perforant path evokes a monosynaptic extracellular field
potential that can be reliably recorded from electrodes placed in the hilar region
of the dentate gyrus. The field potential comprised an initial positive 
component, the excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP), and a negative compound
action potential, the population spike (PS) (see insets of Fig. 10C). The 
positive component provides an index of synaptic activity comprising the summed
EPSPs at the level of the dendrites. The slope of the EPSP was calculated as the
rate of amplitude change for the initial positive component of the dentate gyrus
field potential prior to PS onset. The EPSP peak was taken as the most positive
peak on the waveform. The PS was derived from the amplitude of a line 
connecting the lowest value of the negative potential to the point of intersection of
a tangent connecting the two positive peaks of the potential.
Excitatory and inhibitory synaptic function. Once optimal electrode
placement based on response morphology and amplitude was achieved, responses
evoked by single-pulse stimulation of the perforant path (biphasic square wave
pulses, 0.1 ms duration using a Grass S-88 stimulator, and PSIU-6 constant
current converters) were monitored at 15-min intervals for a minimum of 1 h
to ensure stability prior to commencement of formal testing (Gilbert and Mack,
1999). Responses were amplified, digitized (33 kHz sampling rate), averaged
using LabWindows (National Instruments, Austin, TX) and custom designed
software, and stored on a PC for later analysis. Upon stability, typically 2-3 h
after initial electrode placement, paired pulses were used to probe inhibitory
synaptic transmission. Two pulses of equal stimulus intensity were delivered at
interpulse intervals (IPI) of 10, 20, 30, 70, and 250 ms at a maximal stimulus
intensity of 1500 µA (100%), and those yielding PS amplitudes 50 and 20% of
maximum PS amplitude, independently selected for each individual animal. Ten
pulse pairs were averaged at each IPI and each intensity. Data were expressed
as a ratio of test pulse (pulse 2) to conditioning pulse (pulse 1) PS amplitude.
Excitatory synaptic transmission was evaluated by administering a series of 25
intensities ranging from 50 to 1500 µA (base to peak), with 5 pulses/intensity
averaged and 10 s between each pulse. This comprised the input/output (I/O)
function upon which differences in baseline synaptic transmission were assessed,
as well as the reference I/O to determine the induction of long-term synaptic
plasticity (i.e., pretrain I/O) following administration of theta-burst stimulation.
Long-term potentiation. Immediately following the collection of the 
pretrain I/O, five averages (5 sweeps/average) were collected at 5-min intervals at
a midrange stimulus intensity (probe stimulus) selected to produce a response
at 50% of maximal PS in the pretrain I/O functions. Averages of 10 pulses were
sampled again 1, 15, 30, 45, and 60 min after delivery of long-term potentiation
(LTP)-inducing trains to assess the magnitude of synaptic potentiation within
the immediate posttrain period. LTP was induced by delivering three train pairs
(i.e., two 1500 μA 4-pulse bursts at 400 Hz with a 200-ms interval between
each burst, repeated thrice at 10-s intervals). A second I/O function was 
collected 1 h after train delivery upon completion of probe stimulus sampling at
the 60-min time point. LTP magnitude was determined by the change in EPSP
and PS amplitude of the probe stimulus response before after train delivery as
well as a comparison of these parameters in pre- and posttrain I/O functions.
Statistical Analysis
All data were subjected to ANOVA using Statistical Analysis Software
(SAS, Cary, NC). Repeated-measures ANOVAs were utilized for body weight,
food consumption, and electrophysiological measures of synaptic transmission.
Litter was the unit of analysis. For electrophysiological assessments in which
more than one animal from a single litter was evaluated, the mean across litter
was calculated, and this value was entered into analysis. One-way ANOVAs
were used to evaluate THs, thyroid weights, serum, and thyroid gland analytes.
When significant main effects or interactions were achieved, group differences
were evaluated using Dunnett’s t-test with p value set at 0.05.
RESuLTS
General Toxicity Measures
Food intake dropped from a mean of 24 g/day at the 
beginning of casein diet to 16 g/day during weeks 3 through 6, but
no differences were seen as a function of iodine content in the
diet (Supplementary fig.  1A). As expected, daily food intake
increased during pregnancy to ~25 g/day just prior to 
parturition, and no differences were seen as a function of diet group
(Supplementary fig. 1B). Food consumption of dams rose again
during lactation to a mean consumption of 35 g/day by 
lactational day 10 and a further increase to ~45 g/day for the dam
and her litter at weaning on PN21 (Supplementary fig. 1C). To
calculate daily iodine intake, mean values across these three
phases of exposure were calculated for each diet condition and
MARGINAL IODINE DEFICIENCY, THYROID, HIPPOCAMPUS 181
multiplied by the average content of iodine per gram of chow
and are summarized in Table 1.
Dams gained weight during prebreeding (Supplementary
fig. 2A) and gestation (Supplementary fig. 2B) as expected, and
no diet-related differences were detected. Body weights 
measured postnatally in dam and offspring did not differ across diet
groups (Supplementary figs. 3A-C). These data demonstrate
comparable nutritional status of dams and pups across varying
degrees of dietary ID at all phases of the life cycle examined.
A large number of measures were taken at various ages in 
different life stages. A summary table of the bulk of these measures
indicating where differences from control diets were observed
is presented in Table 2. Although such a summary does not lend
itself to specifics on doses, the bulk of the changes when observed
were limited to one or both of the most iodine-deficient diets.
Analytes in Serum and Thyroid Gland
Iodide in serum. Iodide was measured in the serum of
fetuses, dams, and pups (Fig. 2). As expected, dose-dependent
reductions in serum concentrations of iodine were seen. The
highest levels of serum iodine were seen in nursing pups of D1.
Serum concentrations of perchlorate, thiocyanate, and nitrate
were evaluated because they may each interfere with the Na+/I−
symporter (NIS) (Di Bernardo et al., 2011; Dohán et al., 2007).
With minor exceptions, the mean values were low and constant
across all diet groups and ages (perchlorate < 0.36 ng/ml, nitrate
< 5 µg/ml, thiocyanate < 10 µg/ml [Supplementary Table 1]).
Thyroid gland weights. The average weight of the thyroid
gland provides a crude measure of thyroid gland hypertrophy
in response to falling levels of serum TH. Under control 
conditions, thyroid gland weight of dams was higher in lactating
(~25 mg) than in pregnant dams (~18 mg) (Fig. 3A), and 
thyroid gland weights were lower in pups than in adults (Fig. 3B).
Increases in thyroid gland weight were observed in dams from
D4 and D5 on GD16 and GD20 and at the end of lactation
and were statistically significant in pregnant dams. Significant
increases in the thyroid gland weight of pups were also 
evident and limited to the most deficient diet on PN21. Smaller
increases in PN14 pups did not reach statistical significance.
Thyroid gland iodine and hormones. Figure  4 presents
serum iodide for all groups as a function of dietary iodine and
suggests that lactating dams exhibit a greater degree of serum
iodide depletion than other groups (Fig. 4A). Drops in serum
iodide were associated with lower concentrations of thyroidal
iodine (Fig. 4B), T4 (Fig. 4C), and T3 (Fig. 4D). Mean (± SEM)
concentrations of iodine, T3, and T4 within the thyroid gland
of dams from which these plots were derived can be found in
Supplementary figure 4. Briefly, the concentration of T3 in the
thyroid gland was marginally reduced in D4 dams but with
greater drops evident with greater ID of D5 (Supplementary
fig. 4C). Thyroidal T4 was reduced by 50-75% in the dams of
D4 and D5 during gestation, with further declines evident at the
end of lactation (75-90% declines in D4 and D5; Supplementary
fig. 4B). Pup thyroid gland concentrations of T3 and T4 were
reduced to a similar degree as postnatal dams (data not shown)
but demonstrate a higher sensitivity than dams when data are
expressed as a function of serum iodide (Figs. 4C and D).
Under conditions of mild TH insufficiency, a preferential
shift occurs to augment the relative synthesis and release of
T3 over T4, representing an autoregulatory adaptive response
of the thyroid gland that is independent of serum TSH
(Pedraza et  al., 2006). This autoregulatory shift is reflected
as an increase in T3/T4 ratios in thyroid gland and serum. In
this study, increased T3/T4 ratios were prevalent at the two
lowest iodine diets, were more dramatic in the thyroid gland
than in the serum, and were more exaggerated in the lactating
dam and preweaning pup in the most deficient diet compared
with the pregnant dam (Table 3). Increased thyroid gland T3/
T4 ratios of GD16 and GD20 dams are comparable to those
reported by Pedraza et al. (2006) in nonpregnant female rats
at similar levels of ID in the gland (i.e., 150 and 275%) and
the serum (200 and 250%). In our most deficient diet, much
higher T3/T4 ratios were seen in the thyroid gland for lactating
dams (525%) and PN14 pups (548%). These differences may
reflect upregulation of autoregulatory responses in the thyroid
gland in response to the higher iodine demands of the lactating
dam and the developing pup. The augmentation in T3 synthesis
and release from the thyroid gland during postnatal period
contributes to maintenance of normal levels of serum T3 at the
expense of T4 in serum (see below).
Thyroid gland hormone precursors and metabolites. The
thyroid glands of dams sacrificed on GD16 and GD20 were
also assayed for hormone precursors MIT and DIT and for
hormone metabolites T2 and rT3 (Fig.  4). Thyroidal content
of these compounds did not differ between control dams 
sacrificed at different gestational ages. The precursors MIT and
DIT were reduced in a dose-dependent manner, the degree of
loss more extreme for DIT (~90% reduction in D5) than for
MIT (60-70% in D5), with similar declines at both ages (all
p < 0.001). The metabolite T2 was also suppressed severely (50
and 90%) by D4 and D5, respectively, and comparably across
the two gestational time points. rT3 was not altered by D4 but
reduced by 50% in the most deficient diet on GD16. A similar
but nonsignificant decline was detected in GD20 (Fig. 5D) and
PN21 (Supplementary fig. 4) dam thyroid glands.
Serum THs
Serum hormones in the fetus, pup, and pregnant and
lactating dam are summarized in Figures 5 and 7. No changes
in serum T3 were detected in any group (Figs. 6A and 7A; all
p > 0.18). Reductions in serum T4 were observed in one or
both of the two most deficient diets in all groups. Dam’s T4 on
GD16 was significantly reduced in the most deficient diet and
in both iodine-deficient diets on GD20. Postnatally, significant
declines in dam’s T4 were limited to the most deficient diet
(p < 0.0001). In the fetus, serum T4 was significantly reduced
for both iodine-deficient diets assessed; on PN14 significant
reductions were seen only in the most iodine-deficient diet,
and on PN21 slight declines were evident in D4 and larger
decrements seen in D5.
In general, the increases in serum TSH were small in 
magnitude (an approximate doubling in postnatal dams) and, for
the most part, limited to the most deficient diet. No effect on
serum TSH was seen in GD16 dams, and small increments
were detected on GD20 that increased further in the lactating
dam. No changes in serum TSH were evident in dams on GD16
despite a 50% reduction in circulating levels of T4. Although
a marginally significant increase in TSH was detected in the
serum on PN14 pups (p < 0.049), mean contrast tests did not
show a significant increase in iodine-deficient pups. By PN21,
larger and more consistent increases in serum TSH were evident,
with significant increases detected in D5 pups (p  <  0.0001).
However, even the largest increases reported here were small
relative to other hypothyroid treatments and ID manipulations
(Gilbert and Sui, 2006; Pedraza et al., 2006).
The relationship between thyroidal iodine and serum iodide
content and serum T4 and TSH is summarized in Figure  8.
Pregnant dams and pups were the most sensitive, displaying
greater reductions in serum T4 and less severe reductions in
serum iodide concentrations than the late-gestation fetus or the
lactating dam (Fig. 8A). However, during pregnancy, serum T4
was reduced despite a higher thyroidal iodine content relative
to the postnatal dam or pup (Fig. 8B). TSH was only 
marginally increased in dams and pups at weaning. The relationship
with serum TSH reveals significant increases in serum TSH in
late-gestation dams at low serum iodide (Fig. 8C) and thyroidal
iodine (Fig. 8D) concentrations.
THs in Brain
The content of T4 was assessed using RIAs in brain tissue
collected from GD16 and GD20 fetuses and pups on PN14
MARGINAL IODINE DEFICIENCY, THYROID, HIPPOCAMPUS 183
(Fig.  9). Cortical T4 levels dramatically increased with age
(200 and 500% above GD16 levels at GD20 and PN14, 
respec-tively). Both iodine-deficient diets reduced cortical T4 in the
fetus. Significant and dose-dependent reductions in cortical T4
were observed in the brains of the GD20 fetus (p < 0.0034),
and mean contrast tests revealed significant declines in both
iodine-deficient diets tested. Decrements were also detected in
the GD16 fetal brain, but the control levels were more 
variable and the statistical analysis fell just short of statistical 
significance (p > 0.06). In contrast, no reliable differences in T4
were detected in the cortex of the PN14 pup (p > 0.25). The
relationship of serum T4 to fetal brain T4 is summarized in
Figure 9C in which the sensitivity based on serum T4 appears
greatest in GD20 fetus, followed by GD20 dam > PN14 pup >
PN21 dam. The GD16 dam serum T4 appears the least sensitive
to fetal cortex T4 reductions. Significant reductions in cortical
T4 were seen at serum T4 reductions in dams of ~20%.
Synaptic Transmission and Plasticity in the Dentate Gyrus
of Adult Offspring
Inhibitory synaptic transmission. Hippocampal field 
potentials were examined in male offspring from one iodine-sufficient
184 GILBERT ET AL.
Notes.  Arrows  indicate  either  statistically  significant  increases  or  reductions  in  parameter  in  the  most  deficient  iodine  diet  (Diet  5).  -   indicates  no  statistically
reliable change in that parameter was detected; n/a, not applicable; nt, not tested.
*p < 0.05 Dunnett’s post hoc t-test after significant ANOVA on ratio values.
(D2) and the two iodine-deficient (D4 and D5) diets to evaluate
synaptic function. Assessments were performed well after return
to euthyroid status, beginning ~4 months of age. Consistent with
previous findings, depression of the PS elicited by the second
pulse of the pair was seen at short IPIs (< 70 ms) that primarily
reflect the activation of feedback GABAA-mediated inhibition
(Fig. 10). Augmentation of the population response to the second
pulse of the pair was seen at intermediate intervals, followed by
a second period of paired pulse depression at the longest interval
tested. These phases are dominated by presynaptic potentiation
and feed-forward inhibition, respectively. Clear experimental
control over these physiological processes is evidenced by the
expected intensity and IPI profiles displayed in Figure 10. No
evidence of any dietary-induced alteration in synaptic 
depression or facilitation was detected.
Excitatory synaptic transmission. I/O functions using a
broad range of stimulus strengths were used to examine the
integrity of excitatory synaptic function in adult offspring. As
expected, I/O functions revealed that all groups demonstrated
increases in synaptic response amplitude for EPSP slope, EPSP
peak, and PS, with increasing stimulus intensity. However, the
magnitude of excitatory synaptic transmission was reduced
in diets D4 and D5. EPSP slope (Fig.  11A) and EPSP peak
(Fig. 11B) were suppressed relative to controls and by a 
similar magnitude at both ID levels. A  significant effect of diet
(F(2,26) = 5.08, p < 0.0137) and diet × intensity interactions
(F(48,624) = 9.32, p < 0.0001) were observed for EPSP slope,
and EPSP peak followed the same pattern (both p  <  0.01).
Mean contrast tests of each diet group I/O relative to control
I/O indicated significant reductions at both dietary levels for
both EPSP measures (all p < 0.012). PS amplitude (Fig. 11C)
is a measure of neuronal excitability, the number of granule
cells sufficiently depolarized by the EPSP to activate action
potentials. This measure of baseline synaptic function was also
reduced by ID. The overall effect of diet was not significant (p
> 0.45), but significant diet × intensity interaction was observed
(F(48,624)  =  3.98, p  <  0.0001). Mean contrast tests by diet
revealed significant reductions in PS amplitude for D4 and D5
(both p < 0.0001). Figure 11C depicts the relationship of 
cortical T4 in the GD20 fetus and reductions in synaptic 
transmission. Declines in fetal cortical T4 of ~15% were sufficient to
impair synaptic function in the adult offspring.
Long-term potentiation. LTP is a model of synaptic 
plasticity that reflects the underlying mechanisms of memory
at the synaptic level. It is induced by application of 
high-frequency stimulation to the hippocampal afferents and is
assessed by the magnitude of increase in the EPSP and PS in
MARGINAL IODINE DEFICIENCY, THYROID, HIPPOCAMPUS 185
the dentate gyrus field potential. An increase in EPSP slope
of the probe stimulus was maintained for 1 h after delivery of
LTP-inducing trains, but no significant difference was seen in
LTP magnitude across diets (F(2,26) = 1.56, p > 0.23). A 
significant decrease in the magnitude of PS LTP (F(2,26) = 4.01,
p  <  0.03) was observed, but the differences between diet
groups were small (186, 158, and 178% for D2, D4, and
D5, respectively) and not dose dependent. Consistent with
analysis of probe stimulus change post LTP, an analysis of
responses based on 20, 50, and 100% maximal PS responses
in pre- versus posttrain I/O functions also failed to reveal any
differences in EPSP or PS LTP across dietary groups (data
not shown).
DISCuSSIoN
This study details the effects of responses to graded levels
of dietary ID on the HPT axis in rats. In contrast to many
existing reports, the absence of effects on dam or pup body
weight, food intake, and modest reductions in serum 
hormone signify that we achieved our goal of a model of ID that
produced graded and moderate degrees of TH insufficiency.
Serum, thyroid gland, and brain effects were observed in the
two most deficient diets. No effects were seen on behavioral
indices of sensory or cognitive function using components of
a standard battery of tests used to detect developmental 
neurotoxicity. Persistent reductions in excitatory synaptic 
transmission were evident in three measures of dentate gyrus field
potentials collected from adult offspring from the two most
deficient diets despite provision of more-than-ample dietary
iodine at weaning and return to euthyroid status thereafter.
Very modest reductions in serum T4 (~20%) in the fetus,
neonate, and pregnant or lactating dam were associated with
measurable decrements in brain T4 in the fetus but not in the
neonate. These small reductions in fetal brain T4 appear to be
sufficient to alter the integrity of hippocampal synaptic 
function measured in the hippocampal dentate gyrus of the adult
offspring.
Model of Marginal ID
The maximal degree of serum hormone insufficiency
attained in our study reflects hypothyroxinemia and not
frank hypothyroidism, paralleling the “mild” and “moderate”
ID conditions (1.0 and 0.5  µg I/day) described by Pedraza
et al. (2006) and Schröder-van der Elst et al. (2001). As the
dietary manipulations did not alter food intake, weight gain,
or serum T3, our findings are unconfounded by other 
nutritional insufficiencies or the presence of contaminants that
may compete with iodine for thyroidal uptake. Our goal was
to develop a model of marginal ID, and the findings stand
in sharp contrast to recent reports of behavioral, molecular,
and anatomical impairments accompanying 
developmental ID (Babu et  al., 2011; Dong et  al., 2005, 2011; Gong
et al., 2010a, b; Van Wijk et al., 2008). With the exception
of Babu et al. (2011), other studies indicated that significant
reductions in body weight of dams and offspring, 
developmental delays, and dramatic reductions in TH indicative of
severe hypothyroidism accompanied the dietary 
manipulation. Pretreatment or coadministration with perchlorate is a
common practice in many studies (Escobar del Rey et  al.,
1986, 1987; Kunisue et al., 2011; Lavado-Autric et al., 2003;
Pedraza et al., 2006; Schröder-van der Elst et al., 2001; Van
Wijk et al., 2008). The presence of other contaminants that
inhibit iodine uptake (e.g., thiocyanate, nitrate, perchlorate;
see Blount and Valentin-Blasini, 2006; Dohán et  al., 2007)
and nutritional or other mineral deficiencies (i.e., iron, 
copper, selenium, isoflavones; see Bastian et al., 2010; Hess and
MARGINAL IODINE DEFICIENCY, THYROID, HIPPOCAMPUS 187
Zimmermann, 2004; Schomburg, 2012; Zimmermann et al.,
2007) may contribute to a greater physiological compromise
and more severe disturbance to the thyroid axis described by
these authors. As such, the characteristic that distinguishes
this from previous neurodevelopmental studies is the 
severity of the iodine depletion and the consequent degree of TH
disruption induced by the dietary manipulation. It is at these
modest levels of thyroid disruption where information is
most sparse but also the most essential for the development
of quantitative dose-response models useful for extrapolation
to humans.
Serum Indices of HPT Axis
Serum measures of iodide revealed dose-dependent 
reductions during pregnancy and lactation in dams, as well as in
the late-term fetus and neonate. The largest and most reliable
changes were seen as reductions in serum T4 in the two most
ID diets. In the adult female, pregnant and lactating dam, and
the neonate, serum and thyroidal T3/T4 ratios were increased
with decreasing dietary iodine, indicative of induction of
TSH-independent autoregulatory mechanisms in the 
thyroid gland. Consistent with hormone reductions in gland and
serum, the precursors for TH synthesis, MIT and DIT, were
reduced in the thyroid gland of pregnant dams; DIT was more
affected than MIT and paralleled the increase in T3/T4 ratios
in gland and serum. A leftward shift in the curve describing
the relationship between serum iodide and serum T4 suggests
that pups and pregnant dams are more sensitive to ID than
the lactating dam. A 40% reduction in thyroid iodine content
was necessary to reduce serum T4 by 20% in the dam 
during gestation, whereas larger reductions in thyroidal iodine
were required to disrupt serum T4 in the lactating dam and
nursing pup.
In this study, we were not able to assess metrics of 
hormone regulation in the fetal thyroid gland. Schröder-van der
Elst et  al. (2001) reported that inorganic iodide in plasma
MARGINAL IODINE DEFICIENCY, THYROID, HIPPOCAMPUS 189
and absolute iodide uptake in the fetal thyroid gland are
reduced at moderate levels of ID equivalent to our D5 (based
on degree of maternal and fetal serum TH reductions). An
upregulation of NIS in the placenta and fetal thyroid is not
sufficient to normalize iodine uptake into the fetal gland.
A higher induction of NIS and a larger thyroid gland in the
mother results in no change in absolute thyroidal iodide
uptake in the dam, but the fetal thyroid suffers more under
conditions of competition with the dam for a limited iodine
source. At more severe ID conditions, increases in 
expression of mRNA for deiodinase-I and thyroglobulin (not
observed with modest ID) were seen, but increases were
not sufficient to normalize thyroid iodine uptake (Schröder-
van der Elst et al., 2001). These data suggest that although
the adaptive mechanisms to defend against ID are indeed
present in the fetus (Escobar del Rey et al., 1986; Obregon
et  al., 2005; Schröder-van der Elst et  al., 2001; Versloot
et  al., 1997), they may not be optimally triggered under
modest ID conditions or sufficiently mature to completely
protect the developing fetus.
Brain Indices
The primary means by which TH influences brain 
development is by T3 binding to nuclear receptors to alter expression of
thyroid-responsive genes (Williams, 2008). In adults, 
hypothyroidism is associated with large reductions in brain T4 
concentrations before declines in brain T3 are evident (Broedel et al.,
2003; Pedraza et al., 2006). Constant levels of the “active” 
hormone T3 are maintained in the face of falling T4 by 
upregulation of transporter proteins and the conversion of T4 to T3 by
local deiodinases (Williams and Bassett, 2011). Because of these
compensatory mechanisms, the small reductions in brain T4 we
observed would not be expected to threaten the maintenance of
an adequate supply of T3 to the neuron of the adult rat. However,
this may not be the case in the brain of the fetus or neonate (see
below).
Neonatal brain TH. In a developmental model of severe ID,  minor reductions of T3 in the brain of the pup. Consistent with
Escobar del Rey et  al. (1987) reported that significant reduc- this report, we found significant reductions in serum T4 with no
tions in plasma and brain T4 were accompanied by relatively  change in serum T3 did alter cortical levels of T4 in the neonatal
MARGINAL IODINE DEFICIENCY, THYROID, HIPPOCAMPUS 191
brain. Based on the findings of Escobar del Rey et al. (1987),
the absence of change in cortical T4 in our pups on PN14 
suggests that brain T3 in these brains (on PN14 at least) was also
likely intact. Upregulation of the NIS in the mammary gland
under ID conditions may serve to enrich the iodine supply in the
milk of the lactating dam and provide a degree of protection to
the developing pup brain (Dohán et al., 2003; Escobar del Rey
et al., 1987; Schröder-van der Elst et al., 2001).
Fetal brain TH. In contrast to findings in the adult (Pedraza
et al., 2006) and neonatal brain (Escobar del Rey et al., 1986;
present findings), significant reductions in cortical T4 were
observed in the fetal brain under the conditions of marginal ID
described in this study. In a model of severe ID (i.e., complete
suppression of serum T4 and significant drops in serum T3
in the dam), fetal brain T4 and T3 were reduced by 60-70%
(Escobar del Rey et  al., 1986). This magnitude of change in
serum TH, although sufficient, may not be necessary to 
compromise optimal neurodevelopmental outcome. Our data suggest
that decreases in serum T4 as little as 20% in the pregnant dam
or the fetus are sufficient to reduce fetal cortical T4. In the adult
or neonate, this magnitude of change in cortical T4 would not
be expected to alter brain T3, but the same cannot be assumed
for the fetus. Although we were not able to assess cortical T3
in this study, the minor reductions in T4 that we did observe
in the fetal brain were associated with impairments in synaptic
transmission in adult offspring (see below). Thus, brain 
development was indeed compromised under conditions of marginal
ID that induced only mild serum and cortical T4 reductions.
Importantly, the dissociation between serum and cortical T4 in
the fetal versus neonatal brain also indicates that the standard
serum indices of thyroid status routinely assessed during the
postnatal period in the dam and neonate do not universally serve
as accurate surrogates of hormonal status within the fetal brain.
192 GILBERT ET AL.
Neurophysiological Impairments Accompany Minor
Hormonal Insufficiencies
Electrophysiological indices of synaptic function were
impaired in adult offspring from the two most ID conditions.
At the time of testing, control levels of serum T4 had been
re-established such that these deficits represent irreversible
damage from developmental TH insufficiency. These changes
observed in excitatory synaptic transmission are consistent
with those reported in previous studies from our laboratory
in which hypothyroxenemia in dams or pups was induced by
propylthiouracil (Gilbert, 2011; Gilbert and Sui, 2006) or 
perchlorate (Gilbert and Sui, 2008). We did not see alterations in
LTP, a model of synaptic plasticity in response to ID in the
present study. Deficits in hippocampal plasticity in the dentate
gyrus (Gilbert, 2011; Gilbert and Sui, 2006) and in a different
hippocampal region (CA1) using an in vitro slice preparation
have been reported following transient maternal 
hypothyroidism (Liu et al., 2010; Opazo et al., 2008) or with 
developmental hypothyroidism (Dong et al., 2005; Sui and Gilbert, 2003;
Sui et al., 2005; Taylor et al., 2008). Timing and degree of TH
insufficiency, differential ontogeny of subregions in the 
hippocampus, and regional differences in responsiveness to TH
(Iniguez et al., 1996; Sharlin et al., 2010) may all contribute to
the differential pattern of effects across studies of hippocampal
physiology.
Neurobehavioral Measures Remain Intact
In contrast to brain function assessed by electrophysiological
means, no impairment in behavioral tests of sensory function
or learning and memory was observed. Prepulse inhibition of
the acoustic startle was enhanced, as expected, with increasing
prepulse intensities and was comparable across all diet groups.
In the Morris water maze, a standard test of spatial learning,
clear indices of learning were evident in control and 
iodine-deficient animals, and no differences in acquisition or retention
were evident. We and others have previously observed deficits
in acoustic startle and spatial learning tasks in animals exposed
developmentally to the goitrogens PTU, methimazole (MMI),
or ID, but only with significantly greater degrees of 
hypothyroidism than induced here (Akaike et al., 1991; Axelstad et al.,
2008; Dong et al., 2011; Gilbert and Sui, 2006; Goldey et al.,
1995; Liu et  al., 2010; van Wijk et  al., 2008). We have also
recently reported deficits in trace fear conditioning in adult 
offspring of PTU-treated dams but also at greater degrees of serum
PN T4 reduction than achieved in this study (Gilbert, 2011).
Collectively these data fail to provide any evidence of 
behavioral impairment as a function of this degree of TH insufficiency
associated with the marginal ID conditions characterized in this
model. They stand in contrast to electrophysiological indices
of a persistent impairment in synaptic transmission in the 
hippocampus. One interpretation is that the degree of impairment
in synaptic function observed here is of insufficient magnitude
to have had any effect on brain development of any 
substantial consequence. Another interpretation is that the behavioral
tests examined here tests are not sensitive enough to detect
subtle alterations in brain function. We submit that a persistent
impairment in an integrated measure of communication of a
large population of neurons within a critical synaptic circuit,
demonstrated in vivo, long after return of normal thyroid status,
cannot be readily dismissed as nonadverse just because it is
not accompanied by deficiencies in simple tests of learning and
memory. A similar degree of TH disruption in pregnant dams
induced by other means has been associated with synaptic 
deficits, structural impairments, and altered gene expression in the
brains of offspring (see Ausó et al., 2004; Bastian et al., 2012;
Gilbert, 2011; Goodman and Gilbert, 2007; Opazo et al., 2008;
Royland et al., 2008; Sharlin et al., 2008). Neurodevelopmental
consequences in children born to women with subclinical 
hypothyroidism or suffering from modest degrees of ID have also
been difficult to document. Effects are subtle and the form they
take is very much dictated by the timing of the hormone 
insufficiency (Zoeller and Rovet, 2004). It is also possible that the
behavioral tasks evaluated in this study may be more conducive
to detecting cognitive impairments mediated by postnatal 
hormonal insufficiencies in brain and deficits in synaptic plasticity,
measures that were not altered in this study.
SuMMARy AND CoNCLuSIoNS
A model of marginal developmental ID is described. Various
metrics of TH disruption in serum, thyroid gland, and brain in
the dam, fetus, and neonate were evaluated. Importantly, a 
significant impairment in excitatory synaptic transmission was seen
in adult offspring of iodine-deficient dams who displayed 
relatively modest degrees of TH reduction. A number of parameters
were collected for application to a quantitative BBDR model of
the developing HPT axis described in the accompanying 
article (Fisher et al., 2012). Fetal serum T4 was the most sensitive
peripheral marker of thyroid disruption. The fetus appears more
at risk than the neonate under conditions of ID-brain T4 was
not altered by ID in the neonate despite reductions in serum T4,
but both serum and brain T4 were dose dependently reduced in
the fetus. Reductions in fetal brain T4, although modest, were
consistent with declines in fetal serum T4, and importantly,
were associated with persistent deficits in synaptic function in
the hippocampus. Our data suggest that a reduction in cortical
T4 as little as 15% during fetal brain development is sufficient
to induce permanent alterations in excitatory synaptic function
in the adult offspring, and that this degree of fetal cortical T4
decline was present with serum hormone reductions of < 20% in
the dam or fetus. These findings have implications for regulation
of chemicals that perturb the thyroid axis and the identification
of sensitive life stages (pregnant woman and her fetus) and 
populations (ID) who may be at greater risk to health consequences
of xenobiotic exposure. They further suggest that standard
behavioral tests of neurotoxicity appear relatively insensitive in
their ability to detect brain impairment that accompanies a 
modest degree of developmental TH disruption.
MARGINAL IODINE DEFICIENCY, THYROID, HIPPOCAMPUS 193
SuPPLEMENTARy DATA
Supplementary data are available online at http://toxsci.
oxfordjournals.org/.
FuNDING
This work was partially supported by U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (R832138 to J.F.) and (R832134 to R.T.Z.).
ACkNowLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to thank Drs Fred Beland, John Bowyer, and
Eva McLanahan for critical reviews of an earlier version of this
manuscript. The technical assistance of Lavinia Mills-Herring,
Willard Anderson, Ian Gitata, Danielle Lyke, Katie Paul, Katie
Grant, Tatsuya Kunisue, Jon Haselman, and Brian Butterworh
in various phases of this project is gratefully acknowledged.
The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest.
REFERENCES
Aghini Lombardi, F. A., Pinchera, A., Antonangeli, L., Rago, T., Chiovato, L.,
Bargagna, S., Bertucelli, B., Ferretti, G., Sbrana, B., and Marcheschi, M.
(1995). Mild iodine deficiency during fetal/neonatal life and 
neuropsycho-logical impairment in Tuscany. J. Endocrinol. Invest. 18, 57-62.
Akaike, M., Kato, N., Ohno, H., and Kobayashi, T. (1991). Hyperactivity and
spatial maze learning impairment of adult rats with temporary neonatal
hypothyroidism. Neurotoxicol. Teratol. 13, 317-322.
American Institute of Nutrition. (1977). Report of the American Institute of
Nutrition ad hoc committee on standards for nutritional studies. J. Nutr. 107,
1340-1348.
Andersson, M., Karumbunathan, V., and Zimmermann, M. B. (2012).
Global iodine status in 2011 and trends over the past decade. J. Nutr. 142,
744-750.
Ausó, E., Lavado-Autric, R., Cuevas, E., Del Rey, F. E., Morreale De Escobar,
G., and Berbel, P. (2004). A moderate and transient deficiency of maternal
thyroid function at the beginning of fetal neocorticogenesis alters neuronal
migration. Endocrinology 145, 4037-4047.
Axelstad, M., Hansen, P. R., Boberg, J., Bonnichsen, M., Nellemann, C., Lund,
S. P., Hougaard, K. S., and Hass, U. (2008). Developmental neurotoxicity
of propylthiouracil (PTU) in rats: Relationship between transient 
hypothyroxinemia during development and long-lasting behavioural and functional
changes. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 232, 1-13.
Babu, S., Sinha, R. A., Mohan, V., Rao, G., Pal, A., Pathak, A., Singh, M., and
Godbole, M. M. (2011). Effect of hypothyroxinemia on thyroid hormone
responsiveness and action during rat postnatal neocortical development. Exp.
Neurol. 228, 91-98.
Bansal, R., You, S. H., Herzig, C. T., and Zoeller, R. T. (2005). Maternal thyroid
hormone increases HES expression in the fetal rat brain: An effect mimicked
by exposure to a mixture of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs). Brain Res.
Dev. Brain Res. 156, 13-22.
Bastian, T. W., Anderson, J. A., Fretham, S. J., Prohaska, J. R., Georgieff, M.
K., and Anderson, G. W. (2012). Fetal and neonatal iron deficiency reduces
thyroid hormone-responsive gene mRNA levels in the neonatal rat 
hippocampus and cerebral cortex. Endocrinology 153, 5668-5680.
Bastian, T. W., Prohaska, J. R., Georgieff, M. K., and Anderson, G. W. (2010).
Perinatal iron and copper deficiencies alter neonatal rat circulating and brain
thyroid hormone concentrations. Endocrinology 151, 4055-4065.
Blount, B. C., and Valentin-Blasini, L. (2006). Analysis of perchlorate, 
thiocyanate, nitrate and iodide in human amniotic fluid using ion 
chromatography and electrospray tandem mass spectrometry. Anal. Chim. Acta 567,
87-93.
Broedel, O., Eravci, M., Fuxius, S., Smolarz, T., Jeitner, A., Grau, H.,
Stoltenburg-Didinger, G., Plueckhan, H., Meinhold, H., and Baumgartner,
A. (2003). Effects of hyper- and hypothyroidism on thyroid hormone 
concentrations in regions of the rat brain. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab.
285, E470-E480.
Brucker-Davis, F. (1998). Effects of environmental synthetic chemicals on 
thyroid function. Thyroid 8, 827-856.
Caldwell, K. L., Maxwell, C. B., Makhmudov, A., Pino, S., Braverman, L.
E., Jones, R. L., and Hollowell, J. G. (2003). Use of inductively coupled
plasma mass spectrometry to measure urinary iodine in NHANES 2000:
Comparison with previous method. Clin. Chem. 46, 1019-1021.
Clewell, R. A., Merrill, E. A., Yu, K. O., Mahle, D. A., Sterner, T. R., Fisher,
J. W., and Gearhart, J. M. (2003). Predicting neonatal perchlorate dose and
inhibition of iodide uptake in the rat during lactation using 
physiologically-based pharmacokinetic modeling. Toxicol. Sci. 74, 416-436.
Delange, F. (1994). The disorders induced by iodine deficiency. Thyroid 4,
107-128.
Di Bernardo, J., Iosco, C., and Rhoden, K. J. (2011). Intracellular anion 
fluorescence assay for sodium/iodide symporter substrates. Anal. Biochem. 415,
32-38.
Dohán, O., De la Vieja, A., Paroder, V., Riedel, C., Artani, M., Reed, M.,
Ginter, C. S., and Carrasco, N. (2003). The sodium/iodide Symporter (NIS):
Characterization, regulation, and medical significance. Endocr. Rev. 24,
48-77.
Dohán, O., Portulano, C., Basquin, C., Reyna-Neyra, A., Amzel, L. M., and
Carrasco, N. (2007). The Na+/I symporter (NIS) mediates electroneutral
active transport of the environmental pollutant perchlorate. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 104, 20250-20255.
Dong, J., Liu, W., Wang, Y., Hou, Y., Xu, H., Gong, J., Xi, Q., and Chen, J.
(2011). Developmental iodine deficiency and hypothyroidism impair spatial
memory in adolescent rat hippocampus: Involvement of CaMKII, 
calmodu-lin and calcineurin. Neurotox. Res. 19, 81-93.
Dong, J., Yin, H., Liu, W., Wang, P., Jiang, Y., and Chen, J. (2005). Congenital
iodine deficiency and hypothyroidism impair LTP and decrease C-fos and
C-jun expression in rat hippocampus. Neurotoxicology 26, 417-426.
Escobar del Rey, F., Mallol, J., Pastor, R., and Morreale de Escobar, G. (1987).
Effects of maternal iodine deficiency on thyroid hormone economy of 
lactating dams and pups: Maintenance of normal cerebral 3,5,3’-triiodo-L-thy-
ronine concentrations in pups during major phases of brain development.
Endocrinology 121, 803-811.
Escobar del Rey, F., Pastor, R., Mallol, J., and Morreale de Escobar, G. (1986).
Effects of maternal iodine deficiency on the L-thyroxine and 3,5,3’-triiodo-
L-thyronine contents of rat embryonic tissues before and after onset of fetal
thyroid function. Endocrinology 118, 1259-1265.
Fisher, J. W., Li, S., Crofton, K., Zoeller, R. T., McLanahan, E. D., Lumen, A.,
and Gilbert, M. E. (2012). Evaluation of iodide deficiency in the lactating rat
and pup using a biologically based dose response (BBDR) model. Toxicol.
Sci. 32, 75-86.
Gilbert, M. E. (2011). Impact of low-level thyroid hormone disruption induced
by propylthiouracil on brain development and function. Toxicol. Sci. 124,
432-445.
Gilbert, M. E., and Mack, C. M. (1999). Field potential recordings in 
dentate gyrus of anesthetized rats: Stability of baseline. Hippocampus 9,
277-287.
194 GILBERT ET AL.
Gilbert, M. E., McLanahan, E. D., Hedge, J., Crofton, K. M., Fisher, J. W.,
Valentín-Blasini, L., and Blount, B. C. (2011). Marginal iodide deficiency
and thyroid function: Dose-response analysis for quantitative 
pharmacoki-netic modeling. Toxicology 283, 41-48.
Gilbert, M. E., Rovet, J., Chen, Z., and Koibuchi, N. (2012). Developmental
thyroid hormone disruption: Prevalence, environmental contaminants and
neurodevelopmental consequences. Neurotoxicology 33, 842-852.
Gilbert, M. E., and Sui, L. (2008). Developmental exposure to perchlorate
alters synaptic transmission in hippocampus of the adult rat. Environ. Health
Perspect. 116, 752-760.
Gilbert, M. E., and Sui, L. (2006). Dose-dependent reductions in spatial 
learning and synaptic function in the dentate gyrus of adult rats following 
developmental thyroid hormone insufficiency. Brain Res. 1069, 10-22.
Goldey, E. S., Kehn, L. S., Rehnberg, G. L., and Crofton, K. M. (1995). Effects
of developmental hypothyroidism on auditory and motor function in the rat.
Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 135, 67-76.
Gong, J., Dong, J., Wang, Y., Xu, H., Wei, W., Zhong, J., Liu, W., Xi, Q., and
Chen, J. (2010a). Developmental iodine deficiency and hypothyroidism
impair neural development, up-regulate caveolin-1 and down-regulate 
syn-aptophysin in rat hippocampus. J. Neuroendocrinol. 22, 129-139.
Gong, J., Liu, W., Dong, J., Wang, Y., Xu, H., Wei, W., Zhong, J., Xi, Q., and
Chen, J. (2010b). Developmental iodine deficiency and hypothyroidism
impair neural development in rat hippocampus: Involvement of doublecortin
and NCAM-180. BMC Neurosci. 11, 50.
Goodman, J. H., and Gilbert, M. E. (2007). Modest thyroid hormone 
insufficiency during development induces a cellular malformation in the corpus
callosum: A model of cortical dysplasia. Endocrinology 148, 2593-2597.
Heninger, R. W., and Albright, E. C. (1975). Alteration in tissue and serum
concentrations of TSH, iodide, T4 and T3 induced by various dietary iodide
levels. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 150, 137-141.
Hess, S. Y., and Zimmermann, M. B. (2004). The effect of micronutrient 
deficiencies on iodine nutrition and thyroid metabolism. Int. J. Vitam. Nutr. Res.
74, 103-115.
Hollowell, J. G., and Haddow, J. E. (2007). The prevalence of iodine deficiency
in women of reproductive age in the United States of America. Public Health
Nutr. 10, 1532-1539.
Iniguez, M. A., De Lecea, L., Guadano-Ferraz, A., Morte, B., Gerendasy,
D., Sutcliffe, J. G., and Bernal, J. (1996). Cell-specific effects of thyroid
hormone on RC3/neurogranin expression in rat brain. Endocrinology 137,
1032-1041.
Knudsen, N., Laurberg, P., Perrild, H., Bülow, I., Ovesen, L., and Jørgensen,
T. (2002). Risk factors for goiter and thyroid nodules. Thyroid 12, 879-888.
Kunisue, T., Fisher, J. W., Fatuyi, B., and Kannan, K. (2010). A method for the
analysis of six thyroid hormones in thyroid gland by liquid 
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. J. Chromatogr. B Analyt. Technol. Biomed. Life
Sci. 878, 1725-1730.
Kunisue, T., Fisher, J. W., and Kannan, K. (2011). Modulation of thyroid 
hormone concentrations in serum of rats coadministered with perchlorate and
iodide-deficient diet. Arch. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 61, 151-158.
Laurberg, P. (2009). Thyroid function: Thyroid hormones, iodine and the 
brain-an important concern. Nat. Rev. Endocrinol. 5, 475-476.
Lavado-Autric, R., Ausó, E., García-Velasco, J. V., Arufe, M. del C., Escobar
del Rey, F., Berbel, P., and Morreale de Escobar, G. (2003). Early maternal
hypothyroxinemia alters histogenesis and cerebral cortex cytoarchitecture of
the progeny. J. Clin. Invest. 111, 1073-1082.
Liu, D., Teng, W., Shan, Z., Yu, X., Gao, Y., Wang, S., Fan, C., Wang, H., and
Zhang, H. (2010). The effect of maternal subclinical hypothyroidism during
pregnancy on brain development in rat offspring. Thyroid 20, 909-915.
McLanahan, E. D., Andersen, M. E., and Fisher, J. W. (2008). A 
biologically based dose-response model for dietary iodide and the
hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis in the adult rat: Evaluation of iodide
deficiency. Toxicol. Sci. 102, 241-253.
Merrill, E. A., Clewell, R. A., Gearhart, J. M., Robinson, P. J., Sterner, T. R., Yu,
K. O., Mattie, D. R., and Fisher, J. W. (2003). PBPK predictions of 
perchlorate distribution and its effect on thyroid uptake of radioiodide in the male
rat. Toxicol. Sci. 73, 256-269.
Obregon, M. J., Escobar del Rey, F., and Morreale de Escobar, G. (2005). The
effects of iodine deficiency on thyroid hormone deiodination. Thyroid 15,
917-929.
Opazo, M. C., Gianini, A., Pancetti, F., Azkcona, G., Alarcón, L., Lizana, R.,
Noches, V., Gonzalez, P. A., Marassi, M. P., Porto, M., et al. (2008). Maternal
hypothyroxinemia impairs spatial learning and synaptic nature and function
in the offspring. Endocrinology 149, 5097-5106.
Parham, F., Wise, A., Axelrad, D. A., Guyton, K. Z., Portier, C., Zeise, L.,
Thomas Zoeller, R., and Woodruff, T. J. (2012). Adverse effects in risk
assessment: Modeling polychlorinated biphenyls and thyroid hormone 
disruption outcomes in animals and humans. Environ. Res. 116, 74-84.
Pedraza, P. E., Obregon, M. J., Escobar-Morreale, H. F., del Rey, F. E., and de
Escobar, G. M. (2006). Mechanisms of adaptation to iodine deficiency in
rats: Thyroid status is tissue specific. Its relevance for man. Endocrinology
147, 2098-2108.
Perrine, C. G., Herrick, K., Serdula, M. K., and Sullivan, K. M. (2010). Some
subgroups of reproductive age women in the United States may be at risk for
iodine deficiency. J. Nutr. 140, 1489-1494.
Royland, J., Parker, J., and Gilbert, M. E. (2008). A genomic microarray 
analysis of hippocampus and neocortex following modest reductions thyroid 
hormone during development. J. Neuroendocrinology 12, 1319-1338.
Schomburg, L. (2012). Selenium, selenoproteins and the thyroid gland:
Interactions in health and disease. Nat. Rev. Endocrinol. 8, 160-171.
Schröder-van der Elst, J. P., van der Heide, D., Kastelijn, J., Rousset, B., and
Obregón, M. J. (2001). The expression of the sodium/iodide symporter is
up-regulated in the thyroid of fetuses of iodine-deficient rats. Endocrinology
142, 3736-3741.
Sharlin, D. S., Gilbert, M. E., Taylor, M. A., Ferguson, D. C., and Zoeller, R. T.
(2010). The nature of the compensatory response to low thyroid hormone in
the developing brain. J. Neuroendocrinol. 22, 153-165.
Sharlin, D. S., Tighe, D., Gilbert, M. E., and Zoeller, R. T. (2008). The 
balance between oligodendrocyte and astrocyte production in major white 
matter tracts is linearly related to serum total thyroxine. Endocrinology 149,
2527-2536.
Sui, L., Anderson, W. L., and Gilbert, M. E. (2005). Impairment in short-term
but enhanced long-term synaptic potentiation and ERK activation in adult
hippocampal area CA1 following developmental thyroid hormone 
insufficiency. Toxicol. Sci. 85, 647-656.
Sui, L., and Gilbert, M. E. (2003). Pre- and postnatal propylthiouracil-induced
hypothyroidism impairs synaptic transmission and plasticity in area CA1 of
the neonatal rat hippocampus. Endocrinology 144, 4195-4203.
Taylor, M. A., Swant, J., Wagner, J. J., Fisher, J. W., and Ferguson, D. C. (2008).
Lower thyroid compensatory reserve of rat pups after maternal 
hypothyroidism: Correlation of thyroid, hepatic, and cerebrocortical biomarkers with
hippocampal neurophysiology. Endocrinology 149, 3521-3530.
Thibodeaux, J. R., Hanson, R. G., Rogers, J. M., Grey, B. E., Barbee, B. D.,
Richards, J. H., Butenhoff, J. L., Stevenson, L. A., and Lau, C. (2003).
Exposure to perfluorooctane sulfonate during pregnancy in rat and mouse. I:
Maternal and prenatal evaluations. Toxicol. Sci. 74, 369-381.
Thilly, C. H., Swennen, B., Bourdoux, P., Ntambue, K., Moreno-Reyes, R.,
Gillies, J., and Vanderpas, J. B. (1993). The epidemiology of iodine-defi-
ciency disorders in relation to goitrogenic factors and thyroid-stimulating-
hormone regulation. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 57(2 Suppl), 267S-270S.
Tietge, J. E., Butterworth, B. C., Haselman, J. T., Holcombe, G. W., Hornung,
M. W., Korte, J. J., Kosian, P. A., Wolfe, M., and Degitz, S. J. (2010). Early
MARGINAL IODINE DEFICIENCY, THYROID, HIPPOCAMPUS 195
temporal effects of three thyroid hormone synthesis inhibitors in Xenopus
laevis. Aquat. Toxicol. 98, 44-50.
Valentín-Blasini, L., Blount, B. C., and Delinsky, A. (2007). Quantification
of iodide and sodium-iodide symporter inhibitors in human urine using
ion chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. J. Chromatogr. A 1155,
40-46.
van Wijk, N., Rijntjes, E., and van de Heijning, B. J. (2008). Perinatal and
chronic hypothyroidism impair behavioural development in male and female
rats. Exp. Physiol. 93, 1199-1209.
Versloot, P. M., Schröder-van der Elst, J. P., van der Heide, D., and Boogerd,
L. (1997). Effects of marginal iodine deficiency during pregnancy:
Iodide uptake by the maternal and fetal thyroid. Am. J.  Physiol. 273,
E1121-E1126.
Williams, G. R. (2008). Neurodevelopmental and neurophysiological actions
of thyroid hormone. J. Neuroendocrinol. 20, 784-794.
Williams, G. R., and Bassett, D. (2011). Local control of thyroid hormone
action - role of type 2 deiodinase. J. Endocrinol. 209, 261-272.
Wise, A., Parham, F., Axelrad, D. A., Guyton, K. Z., Portier, C., Zeise, L.,
Zoeller, R. T., and Woodruff, T. J. (2012). Upstream adverse effects in risk
assessment: A model of polychlorinated biphenyls, thyroid hormone 
disruption and neurological outcomes in humans. Environ. Res. 117, 90-99.
Zimmermann, M. B. (2007). The adverse effects of mild-to-moderate
iodine deficiency during pregnancy and childhood: A review. Thyroid 17,
829-835.
Zimmermann, M. B., Burgi, H., and Hurrell, R. F. (2007). Iron deficiency 
predicts poor maternal thyroid status during pregnancy. J. Clin. Endocrinol.
Metab. 92, 3436-3440.
Zoeller, R. T., and Rovet, J. (2004). Timing of thyroid hormone action in
the developing brain: Clinical observations and experimental findings. J.
Neuroendocrinol. 16, 809-818.
Downloadedfrom   http://toxsci.oxfordjournals.org/ byguestonOctober4,2016
Downloadedfrom   http://toxsci.oxfordjournals.org/ byguestonOctober4,2016
Downloadedfrom   http://toxsci.oxfordjournals.org/ byguestonOctober4,2016
Downloadedfrom   http://toxsci.oxfordjournals.org/ byguestonOctober4,2016
Downloadedfrom   http://toxsci.oxfordjournals.org/ byguestonOctober4,2016
Downloadedfrom   http://toxsci.oxfordjournals.org/ byguestonOctober4,2016
Downloadedfrom   http://toxsci.oxfordjournals.org/ byguestonOctober4,2016
Downloadedfrom   http://toxsci.oxfordjournals.org/ byguestonOctober4,2016
Downloadedfrom   http://toxsci.oxfordjournals.org/ byguestonOctober4,2016
Downloadedfrom   http://toxsci.oxfordjournals.org/ byguestonOctober4,2016
Downloadedfrom   http://toxsci.oxfordjournals.org/ byguestonOctober4,2016
Downloadedfrom   http://toxsci.oxfordjournals.org/ byguestonOctober4,2016
Downloadedfrom   http://toxsci.oxfordjournals.org/ byguestonOctober4,2016
Downloadedfrom   http://toxsci.oxfordjournals.org/ byguestonOctober4,2016
Downloadedfrom   http://toxsci.oxfordjournals.org/ byguestonOctober4,2016
Downloadedfrom   http://toxsci.oxfordjournals.org/ byguestonOctober4,2016
Downloadedfrom   http://toxsci.oxfordjournals.org/ byguestonOctober4,2016
Downloadedfrom   http://toxsci.oxfordjournals.org/ byguestonOctober4,2016
Downloadedfrom   http://toxsci.oxfordjournals.org/ byguestonOctober4,2016

TABLE 1 
Mean  (±  SE)  Daily  Food  Consumption  at  Each  Phase  of  the  Study  and  Calculated  Mean  Daily  Intake  of  Iodine  Across  Diet  Groups  
Nominal ng I/g  
Measured ng I/g  
Prebreeding food  
Gestation food  
Lactation food  
Prebreed   
Gestation   
Lactation   
Diet 
of chow 
of chow 
intake (g/day) 
intake (g/day) 
intake (g/day) 
(µg I/day) 
(µg I/day) 
(µg I/day) 
1 
1000 
1300 
19.0 (± 0.60) 
21.4 (± 1.16) 
30.3 (± 2.05) 
24.82 
27.86 
39.32 
2 
225 
205 
18.1 (± 0.40) 
22.5 (± 0.94) 
31.2 (± 2.27) 
3.72 
4.61 
6.38 
3 
150 
135 
19.3 (± 0.70) 
22.1 (± 1.10) 
30.6 (± 1.83) 
2.60 
2.99 
4.13 
4 
50 
36 
18.3 (± 0.58) 
20.7 (± 1.26) 
31.3 (± 2.95) 
0.66 
0.74 
1.12 
5 
25 
10 
19.0 (± 0.84) 
22.3 (± 1.21) 
29.3 (± 2.44) 
0.19 
0.22 
0.29 

TABLE 2 
Summary of Results of Basic Parameters Assessed Across Age and Condition  
Body 
Serum 
Thyroid gland 
Brain function 
Auditory  
Trace  
Morris  Inhibitory  
Excitatory   
Food  
Body  
Thyroid  
sensory  
fear  
water  synaptic  
synaptic  
Synaptic  
intake 
weight 
Iodine 
T3 
T4 
TSH 
weight 
Iodine 
T3 
T4 
gating 
learning 
maze function 
function 
plasticity 
GD16 Dam 
- 
- 
↓ 
- 
↓ 
- 
↑ 
↓ 
↓ 
↓ 
GD20 Dam 
- 
- 
↓ 
- 
↓ 
↑ 
↑ 
↓ 
↓ 
↓ 
GD16 Fetus 
n/a 
nt 
nt 
nt 
↓ 
nt 
nt 
nt 
nt 
nt 
GD20 Fetus 
n/a 
nt 
nt 
nt 
↓ 
nt 
nt 
nt 
nt 
nt 
n/a 
PN14 Pup 
- 
- 
↓ 
- 
↓ 
- 
- 
↓ 
↓ 
↓ 
PN21 Pup 
- 
- 
nt 
- 
↓ 
↑ 
↑ 
nt 
nt 
nt 
PN21 Dam 
- 
- 
↓ 
- 
↓ 
↑ 
- 
- 
↓ 
↓ 
PN60+ Pup 
n/a 
- 
nt 
- 
- 
- 
nt 
nt 
nt 
nt 
- 
- 
- 
- 
↓ 
- 

TABLE 3 
Thyroid Gland and Serum T3/T4 Ratios (Mean ± SEM) and  
Calculated Percent of Control Ratio  
Gland, %  
Serum, %  
Diet N 
Gland T3/T4 Serum T3/T4 control 
control 
Dams 
GD16 
1 
10 
0.22 ± 0.100 
3.26 ± 0.36 
100 
100 
GD16 
4 
10 
0.35 ± 0.014 
3.65 ± 0.29 
160* 
112 
GD16 
5 
8 
0.65 ± 0.065 
6.42 ± 0.47 
295* 
197* 
GD20 
1 
10 
0.21 ± 0.029 
3.73 ± 0.27 
100 
100 
GD20 
4 
10 
0.41 ± 0.026 
4.89 ± 0.25 
196* 
131 
GD20 
5 
7 
0.66 ± 0.058 
6.95 ± 0.81 
314* 
186* 
PN21 
1 
4 
0.16 ± 0.009 
2.34 ± 0.19 
100 
100 
PN21 
2 
5 
0.19 ± 0.014 
2.76 ± 0.27 
124 
118 
PN21 
3 
5 
0.20 ± 0.009 
2.60 ± 0.22 
130 
111 
PN21 
4 
5 
0.32 ± 0.031 
3.57 ± 0.42 
206 
152 
PN21 
5 
5 
0.82 ± 0.161 
6.45 ± 0.75 
525* 
275* 
Pups 
PN14 
1 
4 
0.11 ± 0.005 
2.07 ± 0.09 
100 
100 
PN14 
2 
5 
0.12 ± 0.007 
1.82 ± 0.11 
110 
88 
PN14 
3 
4 
0.14 ± 0.013 
2.03 ± 0.12 
121 
98 
PN14 
4 
5 
0.20 ± 0.017 
2.37 ± 0.11 
183 
114 
PN14 
5 
5 
0.61 ± 0.212 
4.47 ± 0.81 
548* 
216* 

FIG.  1.  Timeline  of  exposure  and  assessments.  Female  rats  were  placed  on  iodine-deficient  diets  for  a  minimum  of  6.5  weeks  before  breeding  and  maintained  on  
these  diets  throughout  gestation  and  lactation.  A  subset  of  dams  and  fetuses  were  sacrificed  before  (GD16)  and  after  (GD20)  the  onset  of  fetal  thyroid  function  and  a  num- 
ber  of  tissues  collected.  The  remaining  dams  were  allowed  to  give  birth,  and  pups  were  harvested  for  tissue  collection  on  PN14  and  PN21.  Dams  were  sacrificed  when  
pups  were  weaned  on  PN21,  and  thyroid  glands  and  serum  were  collected.  At  weaning,  remaining  pups  were  placed  on  standard  laboratory  chow  and  allowed  to  mature  
to  adulthood.  Different  groups  of  animals  were  assessed  on  behavioral  and  neurophysiological  assays  beginning  on  ~PN60  with  completion  of  all  testing  by  ~PN180. 

FIG. 2. Serum iodide after dietary ID. Mean (± SEM) iodide in serum in  
pregnant dam, in late-stage fetus (A), and in lactating dam, pup, and nonpreg- 
nant female (B) in response to dietary ID. Diet-dependent reductions in serum  
concentrations of iodine were seen in all groups. The relationship of dietary and  
serum iodide as a function of life stage may be better appreciated in Figure 6A. 

182 GILBERT ET AL. 
FIG. 3. Thyroid gland weight after dietary ID. Mean (± SEM) thyroid gland  
weight in pregnant and lactating dams (A) and pups on PN14 and PN21 (B).  
Significant increases in thyroid weight were detected only in pregnant dams  
(GD16 F(2,25) = 6.08, p < 0.007; GD20 F(2,26) = 7.11, p < 0.0034) but not  
in lactating dams (F(4,64 = 1.53, p > 0.20). Pups’ thyroid weights were sig- 
nificantly increased on PN21 (F(4,59) = 5.41, p < 0.0009) but not on PN14  
(F(4,54) = 2.22, p > 0.08). Increases when present were limited to the most  
deficient diet in most cases. Asterisks indicate significant difference from D1  
using Dunnett’s t-test, p < 0.05. 

FIG.  4.  Relating  serum  iodide  and  hormones  within  the  thyroid  gland.  Mean  (±  SEM)  iodide  or  iodine  and  THs  in  chow,  serum,  or  thyroid  gland.  Asterisks  
represent  significant  differences  from  D1,  with  more  than  ample  supplementation  of  iodine  to  the  chow  using  Dunnett’s  mean  contrast  test  following  a  significant  
main  effect  of  diet  in  ANOVA.  SEMs  that  are  not  apparent  are  smaller  than  the  figure  symbols.  (A)  Relationship  of  dietary  iodine  (µg/day)  to  serum  iodide  (ng/ml)  
in  dam,  fetus,  neonate,  and  nonpregnant  adult  female  rat.  The  lactating  dam  (PN21  dam)  appears  to  be  more  sensitive  to  dietary  iodine  insufficiency  with  slightly  
lower  levels  of  serum  iodide  than  other  groups  at  the  same  level  of  dietary  intake.  (B)  Relationship  of  serum  iodide  (ng/ml)  and  thyroidal  iodine  expressed  as  a  
percent  of  control  (D1).  Neonates  (PN14  pup)  appear  the  most  sensitive  to  lower  iodine  in  the  thyroid  gland  for  a  given  level  of  serum  iodide.  (C)  Relationship  of  
serum  iodide  to  thyroidal  T4.  As  with  thyroidal  iodine  stores,  neonates  (PN14  pup)  appear  to  be  more  sensitive  to  thyroid  gland  T4  stores  than  pregnant  or  lactat- 
ing  dams  at  lower  levels  of  serum  iodide.  (D)  Relationship  of  serum  iodide  to  thyroidal  T3.  As  seen  in  (C),  neonates  (PN14  pup)  are  more  sensitive  to  declines  in  
thyroid  gland  T3  at  any  given  level  of  serum  iodide.  Greater  overall  declines  in  T4  or  T3  in  the  thyroid  gland  are  consistent  with  greater  percentage  release  of  T4  
over  T3  into  the  serum  (as  gleaned  from  T3/T4  ratios,    Table  3).  Lactating  dams  from  the  most  deficient  diet  also  show  greater  declines  than  dams  during  pregnancy  
and  fall  to  a  plateau  equivalent  with  the  neonate  for  thyroidal  iodine,  T3,  and  T4  and  may  reflect  time  on  diet  in  addition  to  sensitive  life  stage. 

FIG.  5.  Thyroidal  levels  of  hormones,  precursors,  and  metabolites.  Mean  (±  SEM)  TH  precursors  MIT,  DIT,  and  the  metabolites  T2  and  rT3  in  the  thyroid  
gland  of  the  pregnant  rat  before  (GD16)  and  after  (GD20)  the  onset  of  fetal  thyroid  function.  (A)  Significant  diet-dependent  decreases  were  seen  in  MIT  on  
GD16  (F(2,25)  =  29.12,  p  <  0.0001)  and  GD20  (F(2,24)  =  5.29,  p  <  0.0125  (A)  and  in  DIT  on  GD16  (F(2,25)  =  115.12,  p  <  0.0001)  and  GD20  (F(2,24)  =  27.7,  
p  <  0.0001)  (B).  The  TH  metabolite  T2  was  also  significantly  reduced  on  GD16  (F(2,25)  =  81.97,  p  <  0.0001)  and  GD20  (F(2,24)  =  21.64,  p  <  0.0001)  (C).  rT3  
was  also  reduced  in  the  most  deficient  diet  on  GD16  (F(2,25)  =  6.23,  p  <  0.007)  but  not  on  GD20  (F(2,24)  =  1.92,  p  >  0.16)  (D)  or  in  dams  at  weaning  on  PN21  
(F(4,19) = 2.81, p > 0.06) (data not shown). 

186 GILBERT ET AL. 
FIG.  6.  Serum  hormones  in  dams.  Mean  (±  SEM)  serum  hormones  in  pregnant  and  lactating  dams.  (A)  No  detectable  changes  were  seen  in  serum  T3  in  any  
diet  group,  D,  or  age  (all  p  >  0.25).  (B)  Significant  diet-dependent  reductions  were  evident  serum  T4  from  dams  on  GD16  (F(2,25)  =  18.8,  p  <  0.0001),  GD20  
(F(2,27)  =  15.24,  p  <  0.0001)  and  at  weaning  of  pups  on  PN21  (F(4,91)  =  8.29,  p  <  0.0001).  (C)  Serum  TSH  was  marginally  increased  in  dams  in  late  (GD20  
F(2,26)  =  8.66,  p  <  0.0013)  but  not  early  gestation  (GD16,  p  >  0.63).  Postnatally,  TSH  increases  were  detected  in  dams  (P21  F(4,92)  =  5.23,  p  <  0.0008)  and  were  
limited to the most deficient diet group. 

FIG.  7.  Serum  hormones  in  fetus  and  pup.  (A)  Mean  (±  SEM)  serum  T3  was  not  changed  in  the  neonate  (all  p  >  0.25).  (B)  Modest  but  significant  declines  in  
serum  T4  were  seen  in  fetus  (F(2,27)  =  24.53,  p  <  0.0001)  and  PN21  neonates  (F(4,26)  =  13.43,  p  <  0.0001)  from  the  two  most  deficient  diets.  On  PN14,  typically  
the  most  sensitive  postnatal  age,  significant  reductions  in  serum  T4  were  limited  to  the  most  deficient  diet  (F(4,58)  =  30.72,  p  <  0.0001).  (C)  Serum  TSH  increased  
marginally  but  significantly  in  PN14  (F(4,21)  =  2.85,  p  <  0.049)  and  more  robustly  in  PN21  (F(4.53)  =  7.29,  p  <  0.001)  pups  from  the  most  deficient  diet.  Asterisks  
represent  significant  difference  from  control  using  Dunnett’s  mean  contrast  post  hoc  test  applied  when  a  significant  main  effect  of  diet  was  detected  in  the  main  
ANOVA. Serum T3 and TSH were not assessed in the fetus due to insufficient sample volumes. 

188 GILBERT ET AL. 
FIG.  8.  Relating  iodine  in  the  thyroid  gland  to  hormones  in  the  serum.  Mean  (±  SEM)  serum  T4  and  TSH  as  a  function  of  iodine  in  serum  or  thyroid  gland.  
Asterisks  represent  significant  differences  from  the  control  diet  with  highest  level  of  dietary  supplementation  (D1)  using  Dunnett’s  mean  contrast  post  hoc  test  
following  a  significant  main  effect  of  diet  in  ANOVA.  (A)  Relationship  of  serum  iodine  and  serum  T4.  Pregnant  dams  and  neonates  appear  more  sensitive  to  serum  
T4  declines  under  conditions  of  reduced  serum  iodine  than  do  the  lactating  dam  or  the  fetus.  (B)  In  contrast,  the  pregnant  dam  shows  declines  in  serum  T4  with  
less  severe  drops  in  thyroid  iodine  stores  than  the  postnatal  dam  or  pup.  TSH  was  more  variable  and  not  dramatically  impacted  by  ID  in  any  group.  Lactating  dams  
showed  the  largest  increases  in  TSH  (doubling)  with  reductions  in  serum  (C)  or  thyroidal  (D)  iodine.  A  modest  increase  in  TSH  in  late-gestation  dams  (GD20)  
was not seen at a slightly earlier stage of pregnancy (GD16). 

FIG.  9.  THs  in  the  brain.  Mean  (±  SEM)  T4  in  cortex  from  fetal  brain  before  (GD16)  or  after  (GD20)  the  onset  of  fetal  thyroid  function  (A)  and  in  the  cortex  
of  the  neonate  on  PN14  (B).  T4  levels  were  higher  in  neonates  than  in  the  fetus  and  higher  in  late-stage  than  earlier-stage  fetus.  ID  dose  dependently  reduced  
cortical  T4  in  the  older  fetus  at  both  levels  of  ID  tested  (F(2,27)  =  7.06,  p  <  0.0034).  T4  in  the  brain  of  the  younger  fetus  was  also  reduced  but  fell  just  short  of  
statistical  significance  (F(2,24)  =  3.05,  p  >  0.06),  most  likely  due  to  high  variability  in  the  controls.  In  contrast,  neonatal  cortical  T4  was  not  altered  in  the  offspring  
of  ID-treated  dams  on  PN14  (F(4,24)  =  1.44,  p  >  0.25).  (C)  Decline  in  fetal  cortex  T4  as  a  function  of  serum  T4  shows  that  modest  reductions  in  serum  T4  are  
associated with significant reductions in cortical T4. 

190 GILBERT ET AL. 
FIG.  10.  Inhibitory  synaptic  transmission  in  adult  offspring.  Delivering  pairs  of  stimulus  pulses  at  varying  intervals  provides  an  index  of  inhibitory  synaptic  
function  and  short-term  plasticity  inherent  in  the  dentate  gyrus.  The  magnitude  of  the  second  response  of  the  pair  is  modulated  by  IPI  and  stimulus  strength  (pulse  
intensity  producing  [A]  20%,  [B]  50%,  or  [C]  100%  of  maximal  population  response).  A  triphasic  function  is  typically  observed  in  the  dentate  gyrus  with  short  
intervals  leading  to  suppression  of  the  response,  intermediate  intervals  to  an  augmentation,  and  even  longer  intervals  to  a  second  phase  of  modest  suppression.  
This  interval  (IPI  F[4,104]  =  150,  p  <  0.0001)  and  stimulus-dependent  (Intensity  F[2,52]  =  17.32,  p  <  0.0001)  pattern  were  observed  in  this  study,  demonstrating  
clear  electrophysiological  control  over  the  response.  Paired  pulse  functions  were  not  altered  in  iodine-deficient  animal  at  any  IPI  or  intensity  (all  p  >  0.32  for  diet,  
diet × intensity, diet × IPI interactions). 

FIG.  11.  Excitatory  synaptic  transmission  in  adult  offspring.  Compound  field  potentials  evoked  in  the  dentate  gyrus  from  single-pulse  stimulation  (see  inset  
in  C)  of  increasing  intensity  were  recorded  in  adult  offspring  of  ID-treated  dams.  Large  amplitude  potentials  and  orderly  increases  in  three  components  of  the  field  
potential  reflecting  excitatory  synaptic  responsiveness  (EPSP  slope,  A,  and  EPSP  peak,  B)  and  cell  excitability  (PS,  C)  demonstrate  clear  experimental  control  
over  the  electrophysiological  response.  Although  iodine-deficient  diets  were  terminated  at  weaning  and  animals  assessed  in  adulthood  after  full  recovery  of  cir- 
culating  THs,  impairments  in  synaptic  transmission  were  revealed  by  lower  mean  (±  SEM)  amplitudes  in  the  input-output  (I/O)  curves.  All  three  measures  were  
significantly  reduced,  to  equivalent  degrees,  in  both  iodine-deficient  diets  tested  relative  to  controls.  (D)  Magnitude  of  decrease  of  the  EPSP  slope  as  a  function  of  
brain  T4  measured  in  the  fetal  cortex.  As  little  as  ~15%  reduction  in  cortical  T4  is  sufficient  to  permanently  impair  excitatory  synaptic  transmission  in  the  adult  
offspring. 

