TOXICOLOGICAL SCIENCES, 142(2), 2014, 403-417
doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfu187
Advance Access Publication Date: September 19, 2014
Inhaled Diesel Emissions Generated with Cerium
Oxide Nanoparticle Fuel Additive Induce Adverse
Pulmonary and Systemic Effects
Samantha J. Snow*,†,1, John McGee†, Desinia B. Miller*, Virginia Bass‡,
Mette C. Schladweiler†, Ronald F. Thomas†, Todd Krantz†, Charly King†,
Allen D. Ledbetter†, Judy Richards†, Jason P. Weinstein§, Teri Conner§,
Robert Willis§, William P. Linak¶, David Nash¶,k, Charles E. Woodjjj,
Susan A. Elmorejjjj, James P. Morrison#, Crystal L. Johnson#,
Matthew Ian Gilmour†, and Urmila P. Kodavanti†
*Curriculum in Toxicology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, 27599,
†Environmental Public Health Division, NHEERL, US Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle
Park, North Carolina, 27711, ‡Department of Environmental Science and Engineering, Gillings School of Public
Health, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, 27599, §Environmental
Characterization and Apportionment Branch, NERL, US Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle
Park, North Carolina, 27711, ¶Air Pollution Prevention and Control Division, NRMRL, US Environmental
Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, 27711, jjArcadis US Inc., Durham, North Carolina,
27713, jjjIntegrated Systems Toxicology Division, NHEERL, US Environmental Protection Agency, Research
Triangle Park, North Carolina, 27711, jjjjNational Toxicology Program Division, National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, 27711 and #Pathology Associates Inc.,
Charles River Laboratories, Durham, North Carolina, 27703
1To whom correspondence should be addressed at Environmental Public Health Division, NHEERL, US Environmental Protection Agency, 109 T.W.
Alexander Dr., Research Triangle Park, NC 27711. Fax: 919 541 0026. E-mail: snow.samantha@epa.gov.
Disclaimer: The research described in this article has been reviewed by the National Health and Environmental Effects Research Laboratory, U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency and approved for publication. Approval does not signify that the contents necessarily reflect the views and the policies
of the agency, nor does mention of trade names of commercial products constitute endorsement or recommendation for use.
ABSTRACT
Diesel exhaust (DE) exposure induces adverse cardiopulmonary effects. Cerium oxide nanoparticles added to diesel fuel
(DECe) increases fuel burning efficiency but leads to altered emission characteristics and potentially altered health effects.
Here, we evaluated whether DECe results in greater adverse pulmonary effects compared with DE. Male Sprague Dawley
rats were exposed to filtered air, DE, or DECe for 5 h/day for 2 days. N-acetyl glucosaminidase activity was increased in
bronchial alveolar lavage fluid (BALF) of rats exposed to DECe but not DE. There were also marginal but insignificant
increases in several other lung injury biomarkers in both exposure groups (DECe>DE for all). To further characterize DECe
toxicity, rats in a second study were exposed to filtered air or DECe for 5 h/day for 2 days or 4 weeks. Tissue analysis
indicated a concentration- and time-dependent accumulation of lung and liver cerium followed by a delayed clearance.
The gas-phase and high concentration of DECe increased lung inflammation at the 2-day time point, indicating that
Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society of Toxicology 2014. This work is written by US Government employees and is in the public
domain in the US.
403
404 | TOXICOLOGICAL SCIENCES, 2014, Vol. 142, No. 2
gas-phase components, in addition to particles, contribute to pulmonary toxicity. This effect was reduced at 4 weeks except
for a sustained increase in BALF c-glutamyl transferase activity. Histopathology and transmission electron microscopy
revealed increased alveolar septa thickness due to edema and increased numbers of pigmented macrophages after DECe
exposure. Collectively, these findings indicate that DECe induces more adverse pulmonary effects on a mass basis than DE.
In addition, lung accumulation of cerium, systemic translocation to the liver, and delayed clearance are added concerns to
existing health effects of DECe.
Key words: diesel exhaust; cerium oxide; cardiopulmonary; nanoparticle
Epidemiological and experimental studies have indicated a
strong association between air pollution exposure and adverse
cardiopulmonary morbidity and mortality (Brunekreef and
Holgate, 2002; Stanek et al., 2011). Diesel exhaust (DE) 
contributes to overall air pollution and has been extensively studied
for adverse health outcomes in humans and animals (Ghio
et al., 2012; Hesterberg et al., 2009b; Ristovski et al., 2012). Acute
exposures to DE have been shown to increase pulmonary 
inflammation, alter systemic vascular reactivity and contractility,
and promote myocardial ischemia (Cosselman et al., 2012; Mills
et al., 2007; Salvi et al., 1999; Wauters et al., 2013). Increasing 
demand of travel, widespread availability of diesel fuels, and
stricter emission standards have necessitated the development
of alternative fuel technologies. Among these technologies are
methods to increase fuel burning efficiency and decrease 
particulate matter (PM) emission, including the use of fuel borne 
catalysts, particulate filters, and renewable energy sources, such as
ethanol and biofuels (HEI, 2001; Neeft et al., 1996).
Cerium oxide (CeO2) nanoparticles are increasingly being
used as a fuel borne catalyst in Europe, North America, and
elsewhere (Cassee et al., 2011; Johnson and Park, 2012;
Wakefield et al., 2008). Ce-based fuel borne catalysts increase
fuel burning efficiency, decrease exhaust emission of PM on a
mass basis, reduce the number of particles in the accumulation
mode (diameter of 0.1-2.5lm), increase the number of ultrafine
particles emitted (diameter <0.1 lm), and alter the emission 
levels of several gaseous pollutants (HEI, 2001; Jung et al., 2005;
Skillas et al., 2000; Zhang et al., 2013). Metal fuel borne catalysts,
which may also include iron and platinum for diesel 
applications, are often intended for use in combination with 
specialized diesel particulate filters (DPFs) that effectively trap the
metals. However, they may also be used without DPFs where
the metals can contribute to environmental emissions and 
elevate metal concentrations in the air, soil, and water (HEI, 2001;
Johnson and Park, 2012; O’Brien and Cummins, 2010). These
metal fuel borne catalysts form nanoparticles during 
combustion and are effective in promoting soot oxidation and reducing
mass emissions though they can also lead to increases in 
particle number emissions. Further details describing metal fuel
borne catalyst behavior and mechanisms in diesel systems are
discussed by Nash et al. (2013).
Exposure to nanoparticles leads to different toxicological
profiles than larger sized particles because of their large surface
area-to-mass ratio, increased reactivity, and altered deposition,
absorption, translocation, and elimination rates (Geraets et al.,
2012; Shannahan et al., 2012). Studies using in vitro cellular 
models or ex vivo lung slices have resulted in conflicting findings 
following exposure to CeO2 nanoparticles. Several investigators
have reported that CeO2 nanoparticles are protective against 
ag-onist- or ROS-induced cell cytotoxicity, apoptosis, and oxidative
stress (Chen et al., 2013; Hirst et al., 2009), whereas others have
shown minimal to no change in cell viability, cell morphology,
or markers of inflammation and oxidative damage (Fall et al.,
2007; Park et al., 2007, 2008a). Additional studies have 
demonstrated that exposure to CeO2 nanoparticles increase cell
cytotoxicity, oxidative stress, inflammation, apoptosis, and
autophagy (Eom and Choi, 2009; Gojova et al., 2009; Hussain
et al., 2012; Lin et al., 2006; Park et al., 2008b). In vivo, exposure to
CeO2 nanoparticles leads to translocation and accumulation of
Ce in extrapulmonary organs including the liver, kidney, and
spleen (Geraets et al., 2012; He et al., 2010; Hirst et al., 2013; Yokel
et al., 2009), as well as induction of pulmonary and hepatic 
toxicity (Ma et al., 2011; Nalabotu et al., 2011; Srinivas et al., 2011).
Collectively, these studies suggest Ce inhaled along with DE, as
a result of CeO2 nanoparticle fuel additive (DECe) use, may
result in distinct health consequences compared with exposure
to DE alone.
There are only a small number of comparative animal 
studies investigating the differences in cardiopulmonary and 
systemic health effects following exposure to DE and DECe. Cassee
et al. (2012) demonstrated that exposure to DE increased the 
atherosclerotic burden in atherosclerosis-prone mice that was not
seen following exposure to DECe, however, only DECe exposure
resulted in elevated neuroinflammation in the cerebellum and
brain stem. In a study conducted by Ma et al. (2014), it was
shown that CeO2 nanoparticles and DECe led to increased and
sustained lung injury in rats compared with DE alone. Clearly,
the potential adverse health effects from exposure to DE with
the addition of CeO2 nanoparticles are not yet fully understood.
The objectives of our study were to (1) compare the pulmonary
toxicity following exposure to DE and DECe and (2) characterize
the tissue deposition of Ce and cardiopulmonary toxicity 
following DECe exposure for 2 days or 4 weeks with and without a
14-day recovery period. We hypothesized that the addition of
CeO2 nanoparticles to diesel fuel would result in lung 
accumulation and systemic translocation of Ce, and cause greater adverse
pulmonary health effects compared with DE exposure alone.
MATERIALS ANDMETHODS
Animals. Healthy male Sprague Dawley rats (8 weeks old) were
purchased from Charles River Laboratories Inc (Raleigh, North
Carolina). Animals were housed (2 per cage) in polycarbonate
cages containing beta chip bedding and acclimatized for
2-3 weeks in an Association for Assessment and Accreditation
of Laboratory Animal Care-approved animal facility (2161C,
5065% relative humidity [RH], and 12 h light/dark cycle). Rats
were then transported to a nearby satellite animal facility
where they were single housed in polycarbonate individually
ventilated cages with beta chip bedding. Animals received
standard (5001) Purina rat chow (Brentwood, Missouri) and
water ad libitum except during exposures. The U.S. EPA NHEERL
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee approved all 
procedures in this protocol.
Generation and characterization of DE and DECe exhaust. DE for
exposure experiments was generated using a 4.8-kW (6.4 hp)
direct injection single-cylinder 0.320 l displacement Yanmar L70
V diesel generator operated at a constant 3600 rpm. Resistance
heating elements provided a constant 3 kW load. While the
engine is not representative of newer technologies, it does 
represent an important set of legacy technologies likely to remain
in use for decades. This system was chosen because it is 
inexpensive, quickly replaceable in case of malfunction during 
long-term exposure studies, and because small diesel systems have
been used by other groups to study fuel borne catalysts (Miller
et al., 2007) and comparative health effects (Campen et al., 2005;
McDonald et al., 2011). The base fuel was ultralow sulfur diesel
(ULSD, <15 ppm sulfur), purchased locally (Red Star Oil, Raleigh,
North Carolina), while the Ce modified fuel was prepared by
adding the product Envirox (Energenics Europe Ltd, Kidlington,
Oxfordshire, United Kingdom) to achieve a 10-ppm Ce by weight
concentration. In the United States, ULSD was phased in for 
on-road use from 2006 to 2010, and has been used exclusively since
December 1, 2010.
For the first exposure experiment, two identical engines and
dilution systems were used. One engine was fueled with base
ULSD, and the other was fueled with the same ULSD with Ce
additive. These dilution systems consisted of single eductors
(Air-Vac, Model TD26OH, Seymour, Connecticut) operating near
the engine exhaust port, which directed diluted DE without and
with Ce additive (DE and DECe) to two Hazelton 1000 (984 l)
exposure chambers housed in an isolated animal exposure
room. Both eductors were fitted with an orifice that drew in
approximately 2 l/min of DE while using 28 l/min of high 
efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filtered dilution air. The resulting
dilution ratio (14:1 dilution) resulted in target particle exposure
concentrations of approximately 1000 mg/m3. A third control
chamber was supplied with HEPA filtered room air.
For the second exposure experiment, two different dilution
systems were used simultaneously on a single engine to provide
whole emissions to two exposure chambers. These two dilution
systems created low (approximately 100 mg/m3) and high
(approximately 1000 mg/m3) concentration DECe. High 
concentration exhaust was also directed through a HEPA filter to a
third chamber to examine particle free gas-phase diesel 
emissions. To generate sufficient sample volumes for both the high
concentration DECe and HEPA filtered gas-phase exposures, a
different dilution system was used. This system diluted 
approximately 85 l/min of engine exhaust with approximately 1200 l/
min (14:1 dilution) of HEPA filtered air through a cone diluter as
previously described (Gowdy et al., 2010; Sharkhuu et al., 2010).
The low concentration DECe exposure used the same eductor
dilution system described earlier for the first exposure 
experiment. However, dilution flows were increased (140:1) to achieve
particle concentrations and residence times sufficiently low to
preserve an ultrafine mode created by the Ce catalyst. A fourth
control chamber received HEPA filtered room air.
All chamber concentrations (exhaust dilutions) were 
controlled by periodic adjustments of dilution air based on 
continuous mass concentrations determined by a tapered element
oscillating microbalance (TEOM; Rupprecht and Patashnick Co.,
series 1400, Albany, New York). Particle size distributions (PSDs)
were characterized during each exposure using a scanning
mobility particle sizer spectrometer (SMPS; TSI Inc, Model 3080/
3022a, St. Paul, Minnesota). Continuous emission monitors were
used to measure chamber concentrations of PM and gas 
components as described elsewhere (Gordon et al., 2012). Chamber
temperatures, RH, and noise were also monitored. The organic
SNOW ET AL. | 405
carbon/elemental carbon ratio of 0.6 for the particulate fraction
of DE using similar fuel and combustion conditions have been
reported (Sharkhuu et al., 2010).
Animal exposures. Two exposure experiments were conducted.
In the first experiment, rats were exposed to filtered air, DE, or
DECe (high concentration; approximately 1000 lg/m3) for 5 h/
day 2 consecutive days. In the second experiment, rats were
exposed to filtered air, DECe at a low concentration (approxi-
mately 100 lg/m3), DECe at a high concentration (approximately
1000lg/m3), or the gas-phase components of the high 
concentration of DECe for 5 h/day 2 consecutive days or 5 h/
day 5 days/week 4 weeks. The 2-day exposure time point
was chosen to assess acute effects, while the 4-week time point
was selected to evaluate the persistency and progressive nature
of these potential effects. A group of rats exposed to filtered air
or DECe (high concentration) were allowed a 14-day recovery
period after the 4-week exposure to determine reversibility of
health effects. All necropsies for both experiments were 
performed 1 day after the final exposure.
Necropsy and sample collection. At designated time points, rats
were weighed and anesthetized with an overdose of sodium
pentobarbital (50-100 mg/kg, ip; Virbac AH, Inc, Fort Worth,
Texas). Blood was collected via abdominal aortic puncture
directly into vacutainers (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri)
containing citrate for platelet aggregation assay or EDTA for
complete blood counts (CBC). The trachea was cannulated, and
the left lung and right cardiac lobe were ligated while lavaging
the remaining three right lung lobes (apical, diaphragmatic, and
azygous). The three right lung lobes were lavaged with Ca2þ/
Mg2þ free phosphate buffered saline (pH 7.4, 37C) using a 10-ml
syringe. The lavage volume was based on 28 ml/kg body weight,
with the three right lung lobes representing 50% of the total
lung weight. Three washes were performed with the same 
buffer aliquot. The bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) was stored
in 15 ml sterile tubes on ice until processing. The left lung was
inflated with 10% formalin and processed for histopathology.
The right cardiac lobe and a consistent portion of a given liver
lobe from each animal were frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored
at 20C for later analysis of tissue Ce burden. The thoracic
aorta was isolated from surrounding connective tissues and
quick frozen in liquid nitrogen for later RNA isolation and PCR.
Cell differential and BALF analysis. For both experiments, aliquots
of BALF were used to determine total cell counts with a Z1
Beckman-Coulter Counter (Beckman-Coulter, Inc, Miami,
Florida) and cell differentials according to previously described
procedures (Gordon et al., 2013). The cell-free BALF was used to
analyze lung injury biomarkers total protein, albumin, lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH) activity, N-acetyl glucosaminidase (NAG)
activity, and c-glutamyl transferase (GGT) activity as previously
described (Gordon et al., 2013).
Filter and tissue Ce analysis. Gelman Teflo filters (1 lm nominal
pore size, 47 mm diameter; Pall Gelman Sciences, Ann Arbor,
Michigan) containing deposited DECe during daily exposures,
along with lot-matched blank filters, were analyzed for Ce 
content using energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence spectrometry
(EDXRF; Model Epsilon 5, PANalytical, Westborough,
Massachusetts). The analytical method followed the principles
of the U.S. EPA Method IO-3.3 (EPA, 1997).
Lung (approximately 0.1 g) and liver (approximately 0.5 g) 
samples were weighed and microwave digested (Yokel et al., 2009)
406 | TOXICOLOGICAL SCIENCES, 2014, Vol. 142, No. 2
with a mixture of concentrated HNO3 (1.5 ml) and H2O2
(0.75 ml) (Optima grades; Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania) in 10 ml Teflon vessels (SP-D; CEM Corporation,
Matthews, North Carolina). Sample digests were transferred to
acid-cleaned 15 ml polypropylene centrifuge tubes, and diluted
using a solution of 0.4% H2SO4 (10 ml) (Optima grade; Fisher
Scientific) in ultrapure water (Milli-Q; Millipore Corporation,
Billerica, Massachusetts). Ce content was measured using 
inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (ICP-MS; Model ELAN
DRCII, PerkinElmer, Shelton, Connecticut). Ce is not an analyte in
standardized environmental ICP-MS methods; however, we
followed the quality control and run sequence of U.S. EPA
Method 200.8, rev 5.4 (EPA, 1994) to achieve study data quality
objectives. Ce isotopes 140 (reported) and 142 (confirmation) were
monitored, and indium and terbium internal standards were
spiked into all samples, blanks, and standards using an online
mixer. Calibration (PCEN-100; VHG Labs, Manchester, New
Hampshire) and quality control (PLCE2-2 Y; Spex CertiPrep,
Metuchen, New Jersey) standards were diluted with an acid blank
solution that was matrix-matched with the samples. Detection
limits of 0.22 ng Ce/g lung tissue and 0.38 ng Ce/g liver tissue were
achieved.
Pulmonary deposition estimation. The multiple-path particle 
dosimetry modeling software (MPPD v 2.11; Applied Research
Associates, Inc, Albuquerque, New Mexico) was used to predict
the pulmonary deposition fraction of particles for the animals
exposed to the low concentration and high concentration of
DECe for 2 days and 4 weeks. Default rat-specific values 
provided by the software including functional residual capacity 
volume (4.0 ml), upper respiratory tract volume (0.42 ml), head
volume (0.42 ml), and inspiratory fraction (0.5), along with the
average experimental-specific data for tidal volume (VT, 2.5 ml)
and breathing frequency (f, 208 breaths/min), obtained using a
whole-body plethysmography (Buxco Electronics, Inc, Sharon,
Connecticut) as previously described (Kodavanti et al., 2006),
were inputed into the model. Whole-body plethysmography
was performed prior to the start of exposure, 2 days post-expo-
sure, and after 19 days of exposure for the 4-week group. No
major exposure-related effects on breathing parameters were
noted. For the particle properties, density was estimated to be
1.0 g/cc (Yoon et al., 2011) with a geometric standard deviation
(rg) of 1.70 for the low chamber and 1.45 for the high chamber.
The concentration and mass median aerodynamic diameter for
each exposure group were determined by TEOM and SMPS,
respectively, as described earlier.
The estimated pulmonary deposition of PM was calculated
from the following equation as previously described (Wichers
et al., 2006):
DPM ¼ C f  VT  t df  UPM
where DPM¼pulmonary deposition of PM in the total lung (mg),
C¼average
concentration of PM (mg/m3), f¼breathing frequency
(breaths/min), VT¼ tidal volume (ml), t¼ total time of exposure
(min), df¼pulmonary deposition fraction for the total lung as
predicted by the MPPD model, and UPM¼unit conversion
(1 106 m3/ml).
The estimated pulmonary deposition of Ce was calculated
from the following equation:
DCe ¼ DPM  PCe  UCe
where DCe¼pulmonary deposition of Ce in the total lung (ng),
PCe¼percent of Ce present in PM as calculated based on
XRF analysis of the chamber filters, and UCe¼unit conversion
(1 103 ng/mg).
Lung histology and transmission electron microscopy. Left lungs were
collected at necropsy for histopathology. After removal and
inflation with 10% neutral buffered formalin (NBF), the lungs
were placed whole in 10% NBF followed by 80% ethanol. Fixed
lungs were paraffin-embedded, sectioned longitudinally at
5 lm, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) using
standard histological procedures. One H&E-stained section per
animal was evaluated by a board-certified pathologist. 
Semi-quantitative scoring of select pathological findings was 
conducted using severity scores: 0¼not present, 1¼minimal (<10%
of examined area), 2¼mild (11-40%), 3¼moderate (41-80%),
and 4¼marked (81-100%). Images of representative lung 
sections were taken using a Nikon Eclipse E400 microscope (Nikon
Instruments, Melville, New York) and Lumenera Infinity2 digital
camera (Ottawa, Ontario).
Selected formalin fixed lung tissue samples from the second
experiment were processed through an industry standard
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) processing protocol
per Charles River Laboratories, Pathology Associates Inc
(Durham, North Carolina) and embedded in Spurr’s epoxy resin.
Approximately 1 mm thick sections were cut on one of two ultra
microtomes (Reichert-Jung Ultracut E; Leica Microsystems,
Vienna, Austria; RMC Powertome X; Boeckeler Instruments,
Tucson, Arizona), placed on glass slides, and stained with 
tolui-dine blue for histological examination and for final tissue area
selection for TEM. The selected areas were sectioned at 
approximately 80 nm thickness, placed on 200 mesh copper grids, and
stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate using standard 
protocols to enhance contrast on the electron microscope (Zeiss
900 Transmission Electron Microscope, Thornwood, New York).
Photomicrographs were captured from selected fields at 
magnifications of 4270-96 800 to characterize ultrastructural changes
in the lung.
In vitro platelet aggregation and CBC. Citrated blood was 
centrifuged at 200 g for 30 s. An aliquot of the platelet-rich plasma
was collected, and the remaining sample was centrifuged at
2000 g for 2 min to collect a platelet-poor fraction of plasma.
Adenosine diphosphate (ADP)-induced primary aggregation and
rates of aggregation and disaggregation were measured by 
adding 25 ll of ADP (1 104 M) to the platelet-rich plasma fraction
at 37C using a platelet aggregation profiler (Platelet
Aggregation Profiler Model PAP-8E, Bio/Data Corp, Horsham,
Pennsylvania). The light transmission set by the absorbance of
the platelet-poor plasma fraction was used to blank each 
individual sample. Plasma samples from each individual animal
were run in duplicate, and an average of the replicate values
was used. CBC of EDTA containing blood tubes were performed
using a Beckman-Coulter AcT blood analyzer (Beckman-Coulter
Inc).
RNA isolation and real time reverse transcriptase PCR. Thoracic 
aortas from the second experiment (4-week time point) were used
for determination of mRNA expression levels for markers of
inflammation, vascular activity, and coagulation/thrombosis.
Total thoracic aorta RNA was isolated with a commercially
available RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen, Valencia, California) using
silica gel membrane purification. RNA yield was determined
spectrophotometrically on a NanoDrop 1000 (Thermo Scientific,
Wilmington, Delaware). Reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) was
conducted on an ABI Prism 7900 HT sequence detection system
(Applied Biosystems Inc, Foster City, California) as previously
described (Gordon et al., 2013). Primers were purchased from ABI
as inventoried TaqMan Gene Expression Assays, each containing
a 6-carboxy-fluorescein (FAM dye) label at the 50 end. Data were
analyzed using ABI sequence detection software version 2.2. For
each PCR plate, cycle threshold (Ct) was set to an order of 
magnitude above background. For each individual sample, target gene
Ct was normalized to a control gene Ct, hypoxanthine-guanine
phosphoribosyltransferase (Hprt1), to account for variability in
the starting RNA amount. Expression of each exposure group
was quantified as fold change over filtered air control.
Statistical analysis. Statistical analysis was performed using
GraphPad Prism (GraphPad Software, San Diego, California).
One-way ANOVA analysis followed by Bonferroni’s post hoc
test was used to compare differences between exposure groups
at each time point or concentration. The data from each 
experiment and at each time point were independently analyzed. A
t test was used to compare differences between the animals
exposed to filtered air or high concentration of DECe for 4 weeks
and allowed a 14-day recovery period. A p-value <.05 was 
considered statistically significant.
RESULTS
Exposure Characterization
Figure 1A presents SMPS volume PSDs comparing emission
measurements of the base ULSD (DE) and the ULSD with 10 ppm
Ce (DECe). Standard deviations of multiple PSDs are included.
These PSDs were determined from eductor diluted samples 
corrected back to engine stack concentrations as previously
described (Nash et al., 2013). Volume PSDs are calculated from
the measured SMPS number distributions, assuming spherical
particles with unit density, and provide an estimate of the 
relative change in mass emissions, and the distribution of mass
across the PSD. Evident from Figure 1A is that the Ce fuel borne
catalyst is effective in reducing engine volume/mass emissions.
The SMPS data indicate that total volume concentrations
decrease 40% (from 2.1 1013 to 1.2 1013 nm3/cm3) with the Ce
SNOW ET AL. | 407
additive. However, these same data also indicate particle 
number concentrations increase 27% (from 1.1 108 to 1.4 108
#/cm3) with the addition of the Ce nanoparticles. These particles
are associated with an ultrafine particle mode seen in the
10 ppm Ce PSD between 15 and 35 nm. While these particles add
little to the total volume or mass, and are minor compared to
volume reductions in the larger accumulation mode, they 
dominate the number distribution. Median diameters for the 0 and
10 ppm Ce PSDs are 51 nm (number) and 104 nm (volume), and
29 nm (number) and 94 nm (volume), respectively.
The target DE and DECe particulate concentrations were
either 1000 (high concentration) or 100 (low concentration) lg of
PM/m3. Actual PM mass concentrations, the chamber gas 
components, and atmospheric variables are provided in Table 1. In
the first exposure experiment comparing high concentration
exposures, average DE and DECe levels were 1000 and
800 lg/m3, respectively (Table 1). The gas components CO, NO,
and NO2 from the DECe chamber were also decreased. In the
second exposure experiment characterizing the 
cardiopulmonary effects of DECe, we examined the low concentration 
condition because it preserved a bimodal PSD into the exposure
chamber, and we wanted to examine possible effects due to this
characteristic. Figure 1B presents number PSDs comparing DECe
particles from the low and high concentration exposure 
chambers. Note that the high concentration PSD does not indicate
bimodal behavior or the presence of the ultrafine mode seen in
the engine exhaust (Fig. 1A). This is due to the speed of aerosol
kinetics and the distance and residence time (several seconds)
required to transport aerosol emissions from the engine
exhaust to the isolated exposure chambers. At 1000 mg/m3, the
kinetics are too fast to preserve the bimodal PSD observed in
the exhaust (Fig. 1A). Additional dilution (to approximately
100 mg/m3) slowed aerosol interaction, and preserved the
bimodal PSD into the exposure chamber. The total number 
concentration and number median diameter for the high 
concentration exposure was 2.0 106 #/cm3 and 79 nm, respectively.
Corresponding values for the low concentration exposure was
9.3 105 #/cm3 and 31 nm, respectively. However, the bimodal
PSD indicates separate modes with medians of approximately
408 | TOXICOLOGICAL SCIENCES, 2014, Vol. 142, No. 2
Abbreviations: DE, diesel exhaust; DECe, cerium oxide nanoparticles added to diesel fuel; PM, particulate matter; TEOM, tapered element oscillating microbalance; RH,
relative humidity.
22 and 50 nm. While the HEPA filter effectively reduced particle
concentrations, similar levels of all gases were reported for the
high concentration and gas-phase chambers for both the 2-day
and 4-week exposures (Table 1). XRF analysis of the chamber 
filters indicated that Ce additive at 10 ppm concentration resulted
in a final Ce content that was 0.4% and 0.9% of the total PM
mass for the low concentration and high concentration of DECe,
respectively.
Deposition of Ce in the Lung and Liver after Exposure to DECe
Analysis of lung and liver tissue in rats exposed to DECe
resulted in concentration- and time-dependent increases in Ce
content. The lung levels of Ce in rats exposed to the high 
concentration were more than 10-fold greater than the levels
achieved at the low concentration for both the 2-day and
4-week exposure time points (Fig. 2A). The 4-week exposure
resulted in accumulation of Ce in the lung at nearly four times
the levels observed following the 2-day exposure (Fig. 2B). There
was no significant increase in liver Ce levels at the 2-day 
exposure with either concentration; however, increases in liver
cerium levels were noted at both the low and high 
concentrations at the 4-week time point (Fig. 2C). The 4-week exposure to
the high concentration of DECe resulted in over six times the Ce
deposition in the liver when compared with exposure at the low
concentration (Fig. 2D). In addition, when the rats exposed to 
filtered air or high concentration of DECe were allowed a 14-day
recovery period following the 4-week exposure, a 35% reduction
in lung levels and 59% reduction in liver levels of Ce occurred
(Fig. 2B and 2D). Collectively, these data suggest accumulation
of Ce in the lung and liver resulting from an extended exposure
period, followed by a delayed clearance over time.
The MPPD model was used to estimate the fraction of 
particles deposited in the total lung (df) in animals exposed to the
low and high concentrations of DECe for either 2 days or
4 weeks (Table 2). Based on the MPPD model predictions, the
estimated pulmonary deposition of total PM (DPM) and Ce (DCe)
was calculated. These predicted Ce levels were compared with
the measured lung levels of Ce (Fig. 2A) to estimate the percent
of Ce retained in the lungs (Table 2). Exposure to the low 
concentration of DECe resulted in a greater percent of Ce retained
in the lungs as compared with exposure to the high 
concentration at both the 2-day (122% vs 56%, respectively) and 4-week
time point (40% vs 22%, respectively), indicating inefficient
clearance of Ce at the low concentration.
Lung Injury and Inflammation Following Exposure to DE and DECe
In the comparative study examining the 2-day exposure to the
high concentration of DE and DECe in parallel, BALF NAG activity,
a marker for macrophage activation, was increased significantly
in rats exposed to DECe but not DE (Fig. 3A). There were also 
marginal but not statistically significant increases in the levels of 
several other markers of lung injury (Fig. 3B-D) and inflammation
(Fig. 3E and 3F), with DECe resulting in consistently greater values
compared with DE. As the DECe chamber achieved 20% less PM
aAn estimated lung weight of 2.0 g for 12-week-old male Sprague Dawley rats was used to convert total lung deposition to per unit weight (Piao et al., 2013).
Abbreviations: MMAD, mass median aerodynamic diameter; df, pulmonary deposition fraction for the total lung as predicted by the MPPD model; DPM, pulmonary 
deposition of PM in the total lung; PCe, percent of Ce present in PM; DCe, pulmonary deposition of Ce in the total lung.
mass concentration than the DE chamber (Table 1), this suggests
that the effects induced by DECe were underestimated and that
DECe on an equal mass basis is more likely to induce greater
lung injury and inflammation than DE alone.
The 2-day and 4-week exposure studies with DECe consisted
of rats exposed to a low concentration, high concentration, and
gas-phase components from the high concentration. BALF total
protein and albumin, markers of lung permeability, were 
significantly increased in rats following a 2-day exposure to only the
gas-phase components of DECe (Fig. 4A and 4B). GGT activity
levels, a marker of lung cell injury, were significantly increased
in BALF from rats exposed to the high concentration and 
gas-phase components of DECe at the 2-day and 4-week time points
(Fig. 4C). BALF neutrophils were significantly increased 
following a 2-day exposure to the high concentration and gas-phase
components of DECe (Fig. 4D). No significant changes in BALF
alveolar macrophage (Fig. 4E), LDH, or NAG activity levels (data
not shown) were noted. These data indicate that the acute 
pulmonary injury and inflammation following exposure to the
whole exhaust are likely to be driven by the gas-phase 
components of DECe.
Histological and Ultrastructural Lung Effects of DE and DECe
Exposure
Lungs were examined by light microscopy to evaluate the
effects of exposure to the high concentration of DE and DECe.
Two exposure-related findings were apparent in comparison to
the control lung sample (Fig. 5A): (1) minimal to mild 
yellow-brown to black pigmentation within the alveolar macrophages
following a 2-day exposure to DE and DECe (data not shown)
410 | TOXICOLOGICAL SCIENCES, 2014, Vol. 142, No. 2
and 4-week exposure to DECe (Fig. 5B); and (2) minimal increase
in alveolar macrophages (histiocytosis) following exposure to
DECe at 4 weeks with and without a 14-day recovery period
(Fig. 5C and 5D). The alveolar histiocytosis was characterized by
slightly increased numbers of alveolar macrophages that in
general were diffusely distributed throughout the lung. The 
pigmented particles found in the alveolar macrophages from the
recovery animals were more commonly observed in punctate
aggregates, possibly reflecting continued cellular processing of
the material (Fig. 5D). No effects of the gas-phase exposure were
observed (data not shown).
Pulmonary changes were examined by TEM following 
exposure to filtered air or high concentration of DECe for 4 weeks
(Fig. 6A-D). Intracytoplasmic foreign material was observed
within alveolar macrophages from DECe (Fig. 6C) but not control
(Fig. 6A) lungs. This material was characterized by numerous
smooth electron dense bodies ranging in size from 10 to 600 nm
within membrane bound organelles, in some cases containing
variably sized clear spaces. Intracellular edema was also
present in alveolar macrophages following exposure to DECe as
indicated by increased clear space within the cytoplasm
(Fig. 6C). Enlarged alveolar septal capillaries, often with 
neutrophils, were present within the capillary lumens from DECe
lungs (Fig. 6D) compared with control (Fig. 6B). Adjacent septal
and capillary membranes were separated by increased clear
space, indicating edema (Fig. 6D). Animals that were allowed
412 | TOXICOLOGICAL SCIENCES, 2014, Vol. 142, No. 2
Values are calculated as relative fold change over filtered air exposed controls after normalizing the expression with Hprt1. Values
represent mean6SE of six rat tissues, each analyzed in duplicate.
*p< .05, **p< .01 significantly different than filtered air.
Abbreviations: eNOS, endothelial nitric oxide synthase; ET-1, endothelin-1; ETRB, endothelin receptor B; tPA, tissue plasminogen 
activator; PAI-1, plasminogen activator inhibitor-1; TF, tissue factor; TNF-a, tumor necrosis factor-a; ATR1, angiotensin receptor type 1 a.
the 14-day recovery period following the 4-week exposure did
not show improvement in the incidence or severity of alveolar
histiocytosis (data not shown).
Systemic Effects of Inhaled DECe
In general, the CBC encompassing changes in hematological
parameters, platelets, and white blood cell profiles showed 
minimal exposure related changes (data not shown). ADP-induced
platelet aggregation determined in vitro was also not 
significantly affected with exposure to DECe (gas-phase, low 
concentration, and high concentration; data not shown). Relatively
small changes were noted in aortic RNA for markers of vascular
activity, thrombosis, inflammation, and atherogenesis in rats
exposed for 4 weeks to DECe (Table 3). Specifically, expression
of endothelial nitric oxide synthase, tissue factor, and tumor
necrosis factor-a were significantly increased, suggesting that
exposure to whole DECe exhaust or gas-phase components of
DECe may contribute to vascular contractility changes, 
procoa-gulant responses, and inflammation.
DISCUSSION
Health consequences of soot emissions from diesel fueled
engines with CeO2 nanoparticle additive may differ greatly from
those that occur in the absence of a Ce fuel borne catalyst. The
rise in use of this fuel additive will lead to increased 
environmental deposition of Ce, which raises concerns about potential 
long-term health consequences (HEI, 2001). More importantly, the
addition of a Ce catalyst results not only in overall PM mass
reductions but also a modified exhaust chemistry (Zhang et al.,
2013). This change in chemistry and the possibility of Ce 
accumulation in the body over a lifetime of exposure warrants 
examination of potential adverse health effects from an altered emission
profile. Few studies have undertaken examination of health 
consequences following exposure to DECe exhaust, and detailed
evaluation in healthy animal models is lacking (Cassee et al.,
2012; HEI, 2001; Ma et al., 2014). In this study, we undertook 
extensive toxicological analysis of laboratory generated exhausts of
diesel with or without CeO2 nanoparticle fuel additive.
In the first acute study comparing DE and DECe in parallel,
we demonstrated that DECe caused a greater increase in BALF
NAG activity (a marker for macrophage activation) than DE.
Although not significant with other markers of lung injury and
inflammation, this pattern was consistently observed and
occurred despite 20% less mass concentration in the DECe
chamber compared with the DE chamber. These findings 
suggest that DECe exposure might induce greater pulmonary injury
upon acute inhalation, providing support for a recent study that
demonstrated increased and sustained pulmonary damage in
rats intratracheally instilled with diesel particles containing
CeO2 nanoparticles compared to diesel particles alone (Ma et al.,
2014). These data are at odds with the results from another
study which implied that the addition of a Ce-based fuel borne
catalyst may reduce the atherosclerotic burden associated with
exposure to diesel fuel (Cassee et al., 2012). Collectively, these
studies indicate that additional investigations must be 
conducted comparing DE and DECe exposure in healthy and 
compromised animal models to fully understand the health risk
involved with adding CeO2 nanoparticles to diesel fuel.
In our second study, we examined pulmonary and systemic
health outcomes in addition to analysis of Ce tissue deposition
following acute and subacute exposure to whole DECe or 
gas-phase components in healthy rats. The augmented effects on
albumin and total protein following a 2-day exposure to high
SNOW ET AL. | 413
concentration and gas-phase components of DECe were not 
evident in rats exposed for 4 weeks; however, the increases in
BALF GGT activity (a marker for lung cell injury) were sustained,
suggesting that the effect of whole exhaust and gas-phase 
components on GGT activity was not reversible over a 4-week
period. Significant increases in BALF neutrophils with DECe
(high concentration and gas-phase components) were evident
in rats exposed for 2 days but not 4 weeks, suggesting that the
neutrophilic inflammatory response was acute and that a 
blunting of the response occurs with repeated exposure to DECe. This
latter finding differs from other high concentration metal-rich
oil-combustion PM studies where progressive inflammation
was observed upon repeated exposure (Kodavanti et al., 2002).
Light and transmission electron microscopy examination
provided further insights into the morphologic effects of
inhaled DECe in the lung. Ultrastructural changes included
interstitial neutrophils and edema, consistent with increased
neutrophils in BALF observed following a 2-day DECe exposure
and the continued increases in BALF GGT activity. The
increased number of alveolar macrophages and presence of 
pigmentation was similar between the animals exposed to DE and
DECe for 2 days, which corresponds to the findings of Cassee
et al. (2012) who observed a comparable response in an 
athero-sclerosis-prone mouse model. Notably, the alveolar 
histiocytosis, edema, and presence of pigmented particles within the
alveolar macrophages seen at 4 weeks were still apparent after
a 14-day recovery period following exposure to DECe. It is likely
that alterations of the diesel soot particles with CeO2 
nanoparticle additive may contribute to less efficient clearing from the
lung. This would align with recent studies that have 
demonstrated a long elimination half-life and accumulation of Ce in
the lungs following exposure to CeO2 nanoparticles (Geraets
et al., 2012; He et al., 2010).
The high concentration of DECe exhaust contains CO, NOx,
and other organic vapors at environmentally relevant 
concentrations that may contribute to observed health effects in 
different ways. Therefore, we wanted to determine the relative
contribution of gas-phase components in the whole exhaust.
Many of the adverse pulmonary effects as determined by BALF
analysis of DECe at this concentration were also observed 
following filtration of the particles from the exhaust, indicating
that the contribution of gas-phase components cannot be
ignored. These data correspond with a previous study that
demonstrated acute pulmonary injury and inflammation in
normotensive and hypertensive rats following exposure to the
gas-phase components of DE (Kodavanti et al., 2013). CO and NO
are known to have many biological effects including the ability
to induce vasorelaxation (Cooke and Dzau, 1997; Leffler et al.,
2011). Following exposure, these components could reach 
alveolar capillaries where they can directly impact the 
microvasculature contractility. Often these effects are opposite of those
expected from DE (Li et al., 2005; Peretz et al., 2008), which could
lead to underestimation of some adverse health outcomes
observed with whole exhaust. We observed that only the 
gas-phase components induced pulmonary vascular protein leakage
whereas markers of pulmonary inflammation and lung 
epithelial cell injury were noted with both gas-phase and high 
concentration of DECe. This finding supports a previous study
demonstrating increased BALF neutrophils and GGT activity
levels following a 2-day and 4-week exposure to gas-phase and
whole DE in Wistar-Kyoto rats (Gordon et al., 2012). Although an
earlier study from our laboratory illustrated that bulk collected
diesel particles without gas-phase components induced lung
injury in rats (Kodavanti et al., 2011), this current data indicates
414 | TOXICOLOGICAL SCIENCES, 2014, Vol. 142, No. 2
that one cannot conclude that the lung injury resulting from
such exhausts are attributed to just soot particles. Partitioning
of the gas-phase volatile organic substances on soot particles
during exhaust generation and bulk particle collection may 
contribute to the toxicity of bulk collected DE particles, but 
separating these attributes will be technically challenging.
The addition of CeO2 nanoparticles to diesel fuel has been
shown to alter the emission profile and increase the number of
ultrafine particles emitted (Zhang et al., 2013). Our results 
support this observation and, in addition, demonstrate that soot
particles were of smaller diameter at the low concentration
when the dilution factor was increased. Systemic translocation
of smaller particles has been shown to be greater than larger 
particles (Sadauskas et al., 2009), which could potentially result in
increased systemic translocation of particles at our low 
concentration. Examination of health consequences indicated that the
lung injury caused by exposure to the low concentration was
minimal relative to injury caused by the high concentration;
however, we noted that aortic markers of vascular activity and
inflammation were affected similarly by both. The estimated
percent of Ce retained in the lung was greater following 
exposure to the low concentration of DECe when the particle 
diameter range was smaller, indicating that Ce is not as efficiently
cleared when animals are exposed to an increased number of
ultrafine particles. Adverse vascular responses of diesel and 
gasoline exhausts have been noted to occur in 
atherosclerosis-prone mice exposed to low concentrations similar to what is
used in our present study (Campen et al., 2010). Our results
extend these observations by demonstrating effects on vascular
markers in a healthy animal model. At the low concentration of
DECe, the gas-phase components are below the levels where 
systemic impacts are expected (Hesterberg et al., 2009a; WHO, 2010).
Thus, the vascular effects of low concentration exhaust 
emissions may be attributed to the DECe ultrafine particles that have
the propensity to translocate systemically. These results suggest
that vascular outcomes at the low concentration of DECe 
exposure are possible and warrant further examination, including
chronic exposures in healthy and compromised rodent models.
One of the ancillary objectives of this work was to examine
tissue Ce burden and clearance in rats inhaling DECe, especially
as Ce has been detected in the blood from residents of Europe
where this additive is used as a diesel catalyst (Hollriegl et al.,
2010). Extrapulmonary translocation and accumulation of Ce
occurs in various organs following a subacute inhalation 
exposure to CeO2 nanoparticles in rats (Geraets et al., 2012). Our data
correspond with this observation and extend it to illustrate a
concentration- and time-dependent accumulation of Ce in lung
and liver tissue following exposure to DECe. He et al. (2010) have
shown that CeO2 nanoparticles have an elimination half-life
from the lung of 103 days after a single high concentration
exposure via intratracheal instillation. Accordingly, our data
indicate a delayed clearance of Ce from these tissues as 
demonstrated by the small percent that was cleared from the organs in
the rats given a 14-day recovery period. Furthermore, the low
levels of Ce present in the liver following the 2-day exposure
suggest a delay in biodistribution as the Ce is cleared from the
lung. Intratracheal instillation of CeO2 nanoparticles has been
shown to induce hydropic degeneration of hepatocytes, dilate
the sinusoids, and elevate several serum markers of hepatic
toxicity (Nalabotu et al., 2011), suggesting that Ce accumulation
in the liver following DECe exposure might induce liver toxicity
and will need to be considered in future studies. When 
theoretical lung Ce burden was calculated by imputing real exposure
values and ventilatory parameters into the MPPD model, which
did not take into account clearance, and compared to actual
lung Ce concentrations, it was apparent that Ce was cleared
slowly from the lung over time. Thus, the health consequences
of Ce retained in the lung along with soot particle clearance will
need to be investigated further.
Our study design has a few limitations. The mass 
concentrations of DE and DECe used in this study are several fold higher
than ambient exposure levels. However, tailpipe emissions and
near roadway levels of DE can reach mass concentrations in the
hundreds of lg/m3 PM (Buzzard et al., 2009). The low 
concentration of DECe used in our study is likely to occur near roadways
and is more realistic for human exposure. In addition, we found
that the low concentration of DECe preserved a bimodal PSD
and decreased the median diameter of the particles being 
emitted. This allowed us to examine the systemic effects of
increased ultrafine particle number. The high concentration of
DECe, which can occur during an occupational exposure
(Stayner et al., 1998), was used to increase the likelihood of 
finding detectable changes in lung injury biomarkers. In a previous
study using an iron fuel borne catalyst, Nash et al. (2013)
describe that the metal catalyst particles undergo complex
processes where they are incorporated into soot during its 
formation, enhance soot oxidation within the flame, are liberated
from the receding carbon matrix, and continue to interact via
coagulation and agglomeration with each other and residual
soot particles post flame. In the exhaust, these metal catalyst
particles can be incorporated within, deposited externally upon,
or remain independent of the diesel soot particles producing a
bimodal PSD. Depending on dilution, this bimodal PSD 
eventually evolves into a single accumulation mode, but high dilution
rates, characteristic of highway environments, can preserve
this bimodal PSD for tens of minutes. This is an important area
to research further because the rates of deposition, absorption,
translocation, and elimination might differ between CeO2 
nanoparticles and diesel soot particles, which may affect the location
and severity of lung and systemic injury.
In conclusion, we report that inhalation exposures to DECe
are likely to have greater adverse pulmonary effects than DE
alone. We observed that the particle-free gas-phase 
components of DECe, in addition to the whole exhaust, were capable
of inducing pulmonary damage. DECe is also likely to impair
deep lung alveolar integrity upon chronic exposure with little
recovery upon termination of exposure. Finally, we have 
demonstrated that significant quantities of Ce accumulate in the
lung and translocate to the liver with delayed clearance, leading
to increased systemic Ce burden and potential pathological
effects. These novel findings add to the limited data available
concerning exposure to DECe, and suggest that the pulmonary
and systemic health consequences of Ce additive to diesel fuel
should be further evaluated.
FUNDING
This work was supported by the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency/University of North Carolina Toxicology Training
Agreement CR835152010 to S.J.S.; U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency Senior Environmental Employment Program to R.F.T.;
and the Division of the National Toxicology Program of the
National Institutes of Health.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Drs William Boyes and
Kevin Dreher of the U.S. EPA for their critical review of this
manuscript. The contributing authors declare no competing
financial interests or other conflicts of interest.
REFERENCES
Brunekreef, B., and Holgate, S. T. (2002). Air pollution and health.
Lancet 360, 1233-1242.
Buzzard, N. A., Clark, N. N., and Guffey, S. E. (2009). Investigation
into pedestrian exposure to near-vehicle exhaust emissions.
Environ. Health 8, 13.
Campen, M. J., Babu, N. S., Helms, G. A., Pett, S., Wernly, J.,
Mehran, R., and McDonald, J. D. (2005). Nonparticulate 
components of diesel exhaust promote constriction in coronary
arteries from ApoE-/- mice. Toxicol. Sci. 88, 95-102.
Campen, M. J., Lund, A. K., Doyle-Eisele, M. L., McDonald, J. D.,
Knuckles, T. L., Rohr, A. C., Knipping, E. M., and Mauderly, J. L.
(2010). A comparison of vascular effects from complex and
individual air pollutants indicates a role for monoxide gases
and volatile hydrocarbons. Environ. Health Perspect. 118,
921-927.
Cassee, F. R., Campbell, A., Boere, A. J., McLean, S. G., Duffin, R.,
Krystek, P., Gosens, I., and Miller, M. R. (2012). The biological
effects of subacute inhalation of diesel exhaust following 
addition of cerium oxide nanoparticles in 
atherosclerosis-prone mice. Environ. Res. 115, 1-10.
Cassee, F. R., van Balen, E. C., Singh, C., Green, D., Muijser, H.,
Weinstein, J., and Dreher, K. (2011). Exposure, health and 
ecological effects review of engineered nanoscale cerium and
cerium oxide associated with its use as a fuel additive. Crit.
Rev. Toxicol. 41, 213-229.
Chen, S., Hou, Y., Cheng, G., Zhang, C., Wang, S., and Zhang, J.
(2013). Cerium oxide nanoparticles protect endothelial cells
from apoptosis induced by oxidative stress. Biol. Trace Elem.
Res. 154, 156-166.
Cooke, J. P., and Dzau, V. J. (1997). Nitric oxide synthase: Role in
the genesis of vascular disease. Annu. Rev. Med. 48, 489-509.
Cosselman, K. E., Krishnan, R. M., Oron, A. P., Jansen, K., Peretz,
A., Sullivan, J. H., Larson, T. V., and Kaufman, J. D. (2012).
Blood pressure response to controlled diesel exhaust 
exposure in human subjects. Hypertension 59, 943-948.
Eom, H. J., and Choi, J. (2009). Oxidative stress of CeO2 
nanoparticles via p38-Nrf-2 signaling pathway in human bronchial 
epithelial cell, BEAS-2B. Toxicol. Lett. 187, 77-83.
EPA. (1994). Method 200.8 Revision 5.4: Determination of Metals and
Trace Elements in Water and Wastes by Inductively Coupled
Plasma - Mass Spectrometry. Available at: http://water.Epa.
Gov/scitech/methods/cwa/bioindicators/upload/2007_07_
10_methods_method_200_8.Pdf. Accessed October 8, 2014.
EPA. (1997). Compendium Method IO-3.3: Determination of Metals in
Ambient Particulate Matter Using X-ray Fluorescence (XRF)
Spectroscopy. Available at: http://www.epa.gov/ttnamti1/files/
ambient/inorganic/iocompen.pdf. Accessed October 8, 2014.
Fall, M., Guerbet, M., Park, B., Gouriou, F., Dionnet, F., and Morin,
J. P. (2007). Evaluation of cerium oxide and cerium oxide
based fuel additive safety on organotypic cultures of lung 
slices. Nanotoxicology 1, 227-234.
Geraets, L., Oomen, A. G., Schroeter, J. D., Coleman, V. A., and
Cassee, F. R. (2012). Tissue distribution of inhaled micro- and
nano-sized cerium oxide particles in rats: Results from a 
28-day exposure study. Toxicol. Sci. 127, 463-473.
Ghio, A. J., Sobus, J. R., Pleil, J. D., and Madden, M. C. (2012).
Controlled human exposures to diesel exhaust. Swiss. Med.
Wkly. 142, w13597.
SNOW ET AL. | 415
Gojova, A., Lee, J. T., Jung, H. S., Guo, B., Barakat, A. I., and
Kennedy, I. M. (2009). Effect of cerium oxide nanoparticles on
inflammation in vascular endothelial cells. Inhal. Toxicol.
21(Suppl. 1), 123-130.
Gordon, C. J., Jarema, K. A., Lehmann, J. R., Ledbetter, A. D.,
Schladweiler, M. C., Schmid, J. E., Ward, W. O., Kodavanti, U.
P., Nyska, A., and MacPhail, R. C. (2013). Susceptibility of adult
and senescent brown norway rats to repeated ozone 
exposure: An assessment of behavior, serum biochemistry and
cardiopulmonary function. Inhal. Toxicol. 25, 141-159.
Gordon, C. J., Schladweiler, M. C., Krantz, T., King, C., and
Kodavanti, U. P. (2012). Cardiovascular and thermoregulatory
responses of unrestrained rats exposed to filtered or 
unfiltered diesel exhaust. Inhal. Toxicol. 24, 296-309.
Gowdy, K. M., Krantz, Q. T., King, C., Boykin, E., Jaspers, I., Linak,
W. P., and Gilmour, M. I. (2010). Role of oxidative stress on
diesel-enhanced influenza infection in mice. Part. Fibre
Toxicol. 7, 34.
He, X., Zhang, H., Ma, Y., Bai, W., Zhang, Z., Lu, K., Ding, Y., Zhao,
Y., and Chai, Z. (2010). Lung deposition and extrapulmonary
translocation of nano-ceria after intratracheal instillation.
Nanotechnology 21, 285103.
Health Effects Institute (HEI). (2001). Evaluation of human
health risk from cerium added to diesel fuel. Health
Effects Institute Communication, p. 9. Available at: http://pubs.
healtheffects.org/view.php?id=172. Accessed October 8,
2014.
Hesterberg, T. W., Bunn, W. B., McClellan, R. O., Hamade, A. K.,
Long, C. M., and Valberg, P. A. (2009a). Critical review of the
human data on short-term nitrogen dioxide (NO2) 
exposures: Evidence for NO2 no-effect levels. Crit. Rev. Toxicol. 39,
743-781.
Hesterberg, T. W., Long, C. M., Bunn, W. B., Sax, S. N., Lapin, C. A.,
and Valberg, P. A. (2009b). Non-cancer health effects of diesel
exhaust: A critical assessment of recent human and animal
toxicological literature. Crit. Rev. Toxicol. 39, 195-227.
Hirst, S. M., Karakoti, A., Singh, S., Self, W., Tyler, R., Seal, S., and
Reilly, C. M. (2013). Bio-distribution and in vivo antioxidant
effects of cerium oxide nanoparticles in mice. Environ.
Toxicol. 28, 107-118.
Hirst, S. M., Karakoti, A. S., Tyler, R. D., Sriranganathan, N., Seal,
S., and Reilly, C. M. (2009). Anti-inflammatory properties of
cerium oxide nanoparticles. Small 5, 2848-2856.
Hollriegl, V., Gonzalez-Estecha, M., Trasobares, E. M., Giussani,
A., Oeh, U., Herraiz, M. A., and Michalke, B. (2010).
Measurement of cerium in human breast milk and blood
samples. J. Trace Elem. Med. Biol. 24, 193-199.
Hussain, S., Al-Nsour, F., Rice, A. B., Marshburn, J., Yingling, B., Ji,
Z., Zink, J. I., Walker, N. J., and Garantziotis, S. (2012). Cerium
dioxide nanoparticles induce apoptosis and autophagy in
human peripheral blood monocytes. ACS Nano. 6, 5820-5829.
Johnson, A. C., and Park, B. (2012). Predicting contamination by
the fuel additive cerium oxide engineered nanoparticles
within the united kingdom and the associated risks. Environ.
Toxicol. Chem. 31, 2582-2587.
Jung, H., Kittelson, D. B., and Zachariah, M. R. (2005). The 
influence of a cerium additive on ultrafine diesel particle 
emissions and kinetics of oxidation. Combust. Flame 142, 276-288.
Kodavanti, U. P., Schladweiler, M. C., Ledbetter, A. D., Hauser, R.,
Christiani, D. C., McGee, J., Richards, J. R., and Costa, D. L.
(2002). Temporal association between pulmonary and 
systemic effects of particulate matter in healthy and 
cardiovascular compromised rats. J. Toxicol. Environ. Health A 65,
1545-1569.
416 | TOXICOLOGICAL SCIENCES, 2014, Vol. 142, No. 2
Kodavanti, U. P., Schladweiler, M. C., Ledbetter, A. D., Ortuno, R.
V., Suffia, M., Evansky, P., Richards, J. H., Jaskot, R. H.,
Thomas, R., Karoly, E., et al. (2006). The spontaneously 
hypertensive rat: An experimental model of sulfur 
dioxide-induced airways disease. Toxicol. Sci. 94, 193-205.
Kodavanti, U. P., Thomas, R., Ledbetter, A. D., Schladweiler, M.
C., Shannahan, J. H., Wallenborn, J. G., Lund, A. K., Campen,
M. J., Butler, E. O., Gottipolu, R. R., et al. (2011). Vascular and
cardiac impairments in rats inhaling ozone and diesel 
exhaust particles. Environ. Health Perspect. 119, 312-318.
Kodavanti, U. P., Thomas, R. F., Ledbetter, A. D., Schladweiler, M.
C., Bass, V., Krantz, Q. T., King, C., Nyska, A., Richards, J. E.,
Andrews, D., et al. (2013). Diesel exhaust induced pulmonary
and cardiovascular impairment: The role of hypertension 
intervention. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 268, 232-240.
Leffler, C. W., Parfenova, H., and Jaggar, J. H. (2011). Carbon 
monoxide as an endogenous vascular modulator. Am. J. Physiol.
Heart Circ. Physiol. 301, H1-H11.
Li, Z., Carter, J. D., Dailey, L. A., and Huang, Y. C. (2005). Pollutant
particles produce vasoconstriction and enhance MAPK 
signaling via angiotensin type I receptor. Environ. Health
Perspect. 113, 1009-1014.
Lin, W., Huang, Y. W., Zhou, X. D., and Ma, Y. (2006). Toxicity of
cerium oxide nanoparticles in human lung cancer cells. Int. J.
Toxicol. 25, 451-457.
Ma, J. Y., Young, S. H., Mercer, R. R., Barger, M., Schwegler-Berry,
D., Ma, J. K., and Castranova, V. (2014). Interactive effects
of cerium oxide and diesel exhaust nanoparticles on 
inducing pulmonary fibrosis. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 278, 135-147.
Ma, J. Y., Zhao, H., Mercer, R. R., Barger, M., Rao, M., Meighan, T.,
Schwegler-Berry, D., Castranova, V., and Ma, J. K. (2011).
Cerium oxide nanoparticle-induced pulmonary 
inflammation and alveolar macrophage functional change in rats.
Nanotoxicology 5, 312-325.
McDonald, J. D., Campen, M. J., Harrod, K. S., Seagrave, J., Seilkop,
S. K., and Mauderly, J. L. (2011). Engine-operating load 
influences diesel exhaust composition and cardiopulmonary and
immune responses. Environ. Health Perspect. 119, 1136-1141.
Miller, A., Ahlstrand, G., Kittelson, D. B., and Zachariah, M. R.
(2007). The fate of metal (Fe) during diesel combustion:
Morphology, chemistry, and formation pathways of 
nanoparticles. Combust. Flame 149, 129-143.
Mills, N. L., Tornqvist, H., Gonzalez, M. C., Vink, E., Robinson, S.
D., Soderberg, S., Boon, N. A., Donaldson, K., Sandstrom, T.,
Blomberg, A., et al. (2007). Ischemic and thrombotic effects of
dilute diesel-exhaust inhalation in men with coronary heart
disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 357, 1075-1082.
Nalabotu, S. K., Kolli, M. B., Triest, W. E., Ma, J. Y., Manne, N. D.,
Katta, A., Addagarla, H. S., Rice, K. M., and Blough, E. R. (2011).
Intratracheal instillation of cerium oxide nanoparticles 
induces hepatic toxicity in male Sprague-Dawley rats. Int. J.
Nanomedicine 6, 2327-2335.
Nash, D. G., Swanson, N. B., Preston, W. T., Yelverton, T. L. B.,
Roberts, W. L., Wendt, J. O. L., and Linak, W. P. (2013).
Environmental implications of iron fuel borne catalysts and
their effects on diesel particulate formation and 
composition. J. Aerosol. Sci. 58, 50-61.
Neeft, J. P. A., Makkee, M., and Moulijn, J. A. (1996). Diesel 
particulate emission control. Fuel Process. Technol. 47, 1-69.
O’Brien, N., and Cummins, E. (2010). Nano-scale pollutants: Fate
in Irish surface and drinking water regulatory systems. Hum.
Ecol. Risk Assess. 16, 847-872.
Park, B., Donaldson, K., Duffin, R., Tran, L., Kelly, F., Mudway, I.,
Morin, J. P., Guest, R., Jenkinson, P., Samaras, Z., et al. (2008a).
Hazard and risk assessment of a nanoparticulate cerium 
ox-ide-based diesel fuel additive-A case study. Inhal. Toxicol. 20,
547-566.
Park, B., Martin, P., Harris, C., Guest, R., Whittingham, A.,
Jenkinson, P., and Handley, J. (2007). Initial in vitro screening
approach to investigate the potential health and 
environmental hazards of EnviroxTM-A nanoparticulate cerium 
oxide diesel fuel additive. Part Fibre Toxicol. 4, 4-12.
Park, E. J., Choi, J., Park, Y. K., and Park, K. (2008b). Oxidative
stress induced by cerium oxide nanoparticles in cultured
BEAS-2B cells. Toxicology 245, 90-100.
Peretz, A., Sullivan, J. H., Leotta, D. F., Trenga, C. A., Sands, F. N.,
Allen, J., Carlsten, C., Wilkinson, C. W., Gill, E. A., and
Kaufman, J. D. (2008). Diesel exhaust inhalation elicits acute
vasoconstriction in vivo. Environ. Health Perspect. 116,
937-942.
Piao, Y., Liu, Y., and Xie, X. (2013). Change trends of organ weight
background data in Sprague Dawley rats at different ages.
J. Toxicol. Pathol. 26, 29-34.
Ristovski, Z. D., Miljevic, B., Surawski, N. C., Morawska, L., Fong,
K. M., Goh, F., and Yang, I. A. (2012). Respiratory health effects
of diesel particulate matter. Respirology 17, 201-212.
Sadauskas, E., Jacobsen, N. R., Danscher, G., Stoltenberg, M.,
Vogel, U., Larsen, A., Kreyling, W., and Wallin, H. (2009).
Biodistribution of gold nanoparticles in mouse lung 
following intratracheal instillation. Chem. Cent. J. 3, 16.
Salvi, S., Blomberg, A., Rudell, B., Kelly, F., Sandstrom, T.,
Holgate, S. T., and Frew, A. (1999). Acute inflammatory 
responses in the airways and peripheral blood after short-term
exposure to diesel exhaust in healthy human volunteers.
Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 159, 702-709.
Shannahan, J. H., Kodavanti, U. P., and Brown, J. M. (2012).
Manufactured and airborne nanoparticle cardiopulmonary
interactions: A review of mechanisms and the possible 
contribution of mast cells. Inhal. Toxicol. 24, 320-339.
Sharkhuu, T., Doerfler, D. L., Krantz, Q. T., Luebke, R. W., Linak,
W. P., and Gilmour, M. I. (2010). Effects of prenatal diesel 
exhaust inhalation on pulmonary inflammation and 
development of specific immune responses. Toxicol. Lett. 196, 12-20.
Skillas, G., Qian, Z., Baltensperger, U., Matter, U., and Burtscher,
H. (2000). The influence of additives on the size distribution
and composition of particles produced by diesel engines.
Combust. Sci. Technol. 154, 259-273.
Srinivas, A., Rao, P. J., Selvam, G., Murthy, P. B., and Reddy, P. N.
(2011). Acute inhalation toxicity of cerium oxide 
nanoparticles in rats. Toxicol. Lett. 205, 105-115.
Stanek, L. W., Brown, J. S., Stanek, J., Gift, J., and Costa, D. L.
(2011). Air pollution toxicology-A brief review of the role of
the science in shaping the current understanding of air 
pollution health risks. Toxicol. Sci. 120(Suppl. 1), S8-S27.
Stayner, L., Dankovic, D., Smith, R., and Steenland, K. (1998).
Predicted lung cancer risk among miners exposed to diesel
exhaust particles. Am. J. Ind. Med. 34, 207-219.
Wakefield, G., Wu, X., Gardener, M., Park, B., and Anderson, S.
(2008). EnviroxTM fuel-borne catalyst: Developing and
launching a nano-fuel additive. Technol. Anal. Strat. 20,
127-136.
Wauters, A., Dreyfuss, C., Pochet, S., Hendrick, P., Berkenboom,
G., van de Borne, P., and Argacha, J. F. (2013). Acute exposure
to diesel exhaust impairs nitric oxide-mediated endothelial
vasomotor function by increasing endothelial oxidative
stress. Hypertension 62, 352-358.
WHO. (2010). World Health Organization Guidelines for Indoor Air
Quality: Selected Pollutants. Available at: http://www.euro.
who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0009/128169/e94535.pdf.
Accessed October 8, 2014.
Wichers, L. B., Rowan, W. H., 3rd, Nolan, J. P., Ledbetter, A. D.,
McGee, J. K., Costa, D. L., and Watkinson, W. P. (2006). Particle
deposition in spontaneously hypertensive rats exposed via
whole-body inhalation: Measured and estimated dose.
Toxicol. Sci. 93, 400-410.
Yokel, R. A., Florence, R. L., Unrine, J. M., Tseng, M. T.,
Graham, U. M., Wu, P., Grulke, E. A., Sultana, R., Hardas,
S. S., and Butterfield, D. A. (2009). Biodistribution and 
oxidative stress effects of a systemically-introduced
SNOW ET AL. | 417
commercial ceria engineered nanomaterial. Nanotoxicology
3, 234-248.
Yoon, J., Kim, M., Song, S., and Chun, K. M. (2011).
Calculation of mass-weighted distribution of diesel 
particulate matters using primary particle density. J. Aerosol.
Sci. 42, 419-427.
Zhang, J., Nazarenko, Y., Zhang, L., Calderon, L., Lee, K. B.,
Garfunkel, E., Schwander, S., Tetley, T. D., Chung, K. F.,
Porter, A. E., et al. (2013). Impacts of a nanosized ceria 
additive on diesel engine emissions of particulate and gaseous
pollutants. Environ. Sci. Technol. 47, 13077-13085.
Downloadedfrom   http://toxsci.oxfordjournals.org/ byguestonOctober4,2016
Downloadedfrom   http://toxsci.oxfordjournals.org/ byguestonOctober4,2016
Downloadedfrom   http://toxsci.oxfordjournals.org/ byguestonOctober4,2016
Downloadedfrom   http://toxsci.oxfordjournals.org/ byguestonOctober4,2016
Downloadedfrom   http://toxsci.oxfordjournals.org/ byguestonOctober4,2016
Downloadedfrom   http://toxsci.oxfordjournals.org/ byguestonOctober4,2016
Downloadedfrom   http://toxsci.oxfordjournals.org/ byguestonOctober4,2016
Downloadedfrom   http://toxsci.oxfordjournals.org/ byguestonOctober4,2016
Downloadedfrom   http://toxsci.oxfordjournals.org/ byguestonOctober4,2016
Downloadedfrom   http://toxsci.oxfordjournals.org/ byguestonOctober4,2016
Downloadedfrom   http://toxsci.oxfordjournals.org/ byguestonOctober4,2016
Downloadedfrom   http://toxsci.oxfordjournals.org/ byguestonOctober4,2016
Downloadedfrom   http://toxsci.oxfordjournals.org/ byguestonOctober4,2016
Downloadedfrom   http://toxsci.oxfordjournals.org/ byguestonOctober4,2016
Downloadedfrom   http://toxsci.oxfordjournals.org/ byguestonOctober4,2016

TABLE 1. Chamber Operating Conditions during 2-Day and 4-Week Exposure of Rats to Filtered Air, DE, and DECe 
Chamber parameter 
Filtered air 
DE (high concentration) 
DECe (high concentration) 
2-Day exposure comparing DE and DECe 
PM mass, TEOM (lg/m3) 
0.56 1.4 
1015.36 103.2 
798.16 12.2 
O2 (%) 
20.86 0.3 
20.76 0.2 
20.86 0.3 
CO (ppm) 
1.76 0.3 
11.86 1.4 
9.36 0.6 
NO (ppm) 
0.36 0.2 
5.16 0.5 
3.56 0.1 
NO2 (ppm) 
0.36 0.1 
0.56 0.2 
0.46 0.1 
Temperature (F) 
68.96 0.7 
76.86 0.2 
71.36 0.4 
RH (%) 
54.86 0.1 
37.16 0.3 
32.26 0.3 
Chamber parameter 
Filtered air 
DECe (gas-phase) 
DECe (low concentration) 
DECe (high concentration.) 
2-Day DECe exposure 
PM mass, TEOM (lg/m3) 
1.46 0.2 
27.46 8.4 
66.46 9.4 
1003.56 31.6 
O2 (%) 
21.06 0.1 
20.16 0.4 
21.06 0.1 
20.06 0.4 
CO (ppm) 
0.26 0.1 
40.56 15.8 
3.46 0.6 
39.36 18.5 
NO (ppm) 
0.26 0.1 
37.06 4.8 
3.36 0.9 
36.56 8.9 
NO2 (ppm) 
0.46 0.3 
5.56 1.2 
1.06 0.3 
4.16 1.4 
Temperature (F) 
74.76 0.6 
73.06 0.5 
74.06 0.4 
72.46 0.3 
RH (%) 
41.86 5.3 
49.36 2.9 
48.96 3.6 
36.46 0.7 
Chamber parameter 
Filtered air 
DECe (gas-phase) 
DECe (low concentration) 
DECe (high concentration) 
4-Week DECe exposure 
PM mass, TEOM (lg/m3) 
1.46 0.1 
30.16 7.1 
68.46 6.1 
988.66 54.4 
O2 (%) 
21.06 0.2 
20.16 0.4 
21.16 0.3 
20.06 0.4 
CO (ppm) 
0.36 0.2 
44.36 10.7 
3.26 0.6 
42.66 15.0 
NO (ppm) 
0.46 0.3 
37.56 4.3 
2.86 0.8 
35.36 9.8 
NO2 (ppm) 
0.66 0.5 
5.66 1.1 
0.76 0.3 
4.06 1.5 
Temperature (F) 
73.66 1.0 
72.66 0.5 
73.96 0.6 
72.16 0.9 
RH (%) 
44.06 5.1 
49.56 3.1 
51.56 4.3 
36.06 0.9 
Each value in the table represents the average6SD of the mean daily values for each exposure day. 

TABLE 2. Estimated Pulmonary Deposition of PM and Ce 
DECe 
Length of PM mass 
MMAD 
df 
Estimated DPM 
PCe (%) 
Estimated DCe 
Measured lung 
Estimated 
exposure (mg/m3) 
(mg/g lung 
(ng/g lung 
Ce levels 
lung retention 
tissue)a 
tissue)a 
(ng/g lung tissue) 
of Ce (%) 
Low concentration 2 Days 
66.4 
31 
0.290 
3.0 
0.36 
10.8 
13.2 
122.2 
4 Weeks 
68.4 
31 
0.290 
30.9 
0.39 
120.7 
48.5 
40.2 
High concentration 2 Days 
1003.5 
79 
0.189 
29.6 
0.89 
263.3 
148.0 
56.2 
4 Weeks 
988.6 
79 
0.189 
291.4 
0.85 
2477.6 
541.3 
21.8 

TABLE 3. Changes in Aortic RNA for Markers of Vasoconstriction, Thrombosis, Inflammation, and Atherogenesis 
in Rats Exposed to DECe for 4 weeks 
Marker 
Filtered air 
DECe (gas-phase) 
DECe (low concentration) 
DECe (high concentration) 
eNOS 
1.056 0.15 
1.9860.25 
2.1860.39* 
2.2460.31* 
ET-1 
1.126 0.23 
1.3360.16 
1.5760.14 
1.4760.15 
ETRB 
1.196 0.33 
1.7360.36 
1.8860.23 
1.5860.37 
tPA 
1.056 0.13 
1.5860.20 
1.4160.15 
1.2360.09 
PAI-1 
1.186 0.35 
0.9260.20 
2.8860.78 
1.0860.32 
TF 
1.046 0.11 
1.7260.17** 
1.5260.10 
1.6460.17* 
TNF-a 
1.176 0.29 
2.1560.09* 
2.4360.18** 
1.8460.25 
ATR1 
1.106 0.22 
1.7560.34 
1.8760.47 
1.8460.33 
Caveolin-1 
1.046 0.12 
1.1360.07 
1.0160.06 
1.2560.10 

FIG. 1. Scanning mobility particle sizer spectrometer particle size distributions measured in the diesel engine exhaust and exposure chambers. A, Particle volume dis- 
tributions calculated from measured particle number distributions and corrected for dilution to engine exhaust concentrations comparing emissions without (diesel 
exhaust [DE]: 0 ppm) and with (cerium oxide nanoparticles added to diesel fuel [DECe]: 10 ppm) Ce additive. B, Particle number distributions measured from the low 
concentration and high concentration exposure chambers. Average values with standard deviations are presented. 

SNOW ET AL. | 409 
FIG. 2. Concentration- and time-dependent accumulation of Ce in the lungs and livers of rats inhaling DE with Ce additive. Ce levels following exposure to filtered air 
or DECe (gas-phase, low concentration, or high concentration) for 2 days, 4 weeks, or 4 weeks with a 14-day recovery period were analyzed in the A, B, lung and C, D, 
liver by inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry. B and D, Ce levels following exposure to the high concentration of DECe were compared at the different time 
points. Data show mean6SE of n¼8 rats per group. *p< .05; **p< .01; ***p< .001 significantly different from other groups. 

FIG. 3. Comparative effect of DE and DECe exposures on lung injury markers and inflammation. Rats were exposed to filtered air, DE, or DECe for two consecutive days. 
Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) samples were collected 1 day after final exposure and analyzed for A, N-acetyl glucosaminidase (NAG) activity, B, total protein, C, 
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) activity, D, c-glutamyl transferase (GGT) activity, E, alveolar macrophages, and F, neutrophils. Data show mean6SE of n¼6 rats/group. 
*p< .05 significantly different from other groups. 

SNOW ET AL. | 411 
FIG. 4. Acute and long-term effect of DECe exposures on lung injury markers and inflammation. Rats were exposed to filtered air or DECe (gas-phase, low concentra- 
tion, or high concentration) for 2 days, 4 weeks, or 4 weeks with a 14-day recovery period. Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) samples were collected 1 day after final 
exposure or recovery period and analyzed for A, total protein, B, albumin, C, GGT activity, D, neutrophils, and E, alveolar macrophages. Data show mean6SE of n¼8 
rats/group. *p< .05; **p< .01; ***p< .001 significantly different from other groups. 

FIG. 5. Histopathological effects in the lung following exposure to DECe. A, Control animal exposed to filtered air for 4 weeks: Normal alveolar air spaces and septa. Air 
spaces contain scattered pulmonary interstitial macrophages (arrow). B, Rat exposed to DECe (high concentration) for 4 weeks: Alveolar air spaces contain increased 
numbers of macrophages with minimal to mild pigmentation. C, Rat exposed to DECe (high concentration) for 4 weeks: Higher magnification view of pulmonary alveo- 
lar macrophages containing dark yellow to black intracytoplasmic pigments. D, Rat exposed to DECe (high concentration) for 4 weeks with a 14-day recovery: Increased 
numbers of pulmonary alveolar macrophages containing intracytoplasmic pigment. Images were taken at an objective magnification of 40 (A, B) or 60 (C, D). 

FIG. 6. Pulmonary changes on transmission electron microscopy following exposure to DECe. A, Control rat exposed to filtered air for 4 weeks: A normal pulmonary 
interstitial macrophage with several intracytoplasmic primary and secondary lysosomal vacuoles of varying electron density present. B, Control animal exposed to fil- 
tered air for 4 weeks: A normal alveolar septal capillary. Two elliptical erythrocytes are present within the capillary lumen (arrows). C, Rat exposed to DECe (high con- 
centration) for 4 weeks: A pulmonary alveolar macrophage containing possible intracytoplasmic foreign material. The cytoplasm is filled with multiple smooth 
electron dense bodies ranging in size from 10 to 600 nm within membrane bound organelles (arrows). Multiple clear spaces appear within the foreign material (*). 
Increased clear space within the cytoplasm indicates intracellular edema. D, Rat exposed to DECe (high concentration) for 4 weeks: An enlarged alveolar septal capil- 
lary. Three erythrocytes (*) and two neutrophils (þ) are present within the capillary lumen. Adjacent septal and capillary membranes are separated by increased clear 
space, indicating edema. Images were taken at a magnification of 15 400 (A, B, D) or 22 200 (C). 

